T Five L L
HE

OVE

ANGUAGES

THE Five LOVE LANGUAGES
How to Express Heartfelt Commitment to
Your Mate

G C
ARY

HAPMAN

NORTHFIELD PUBLISHING
CHICAGO

© 1992, 1995, 2004
by Gary D. Chapman
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any form without permission in writing from the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
articles or reviews.
Scripture quotations, unless noted otherwise, are taken
from the Holy Bible: New International Version®. Copyright
© 1973, 1978, 1984, International Bible Society. Used by
permission of Zondervan Publishing House. All rights
reserved.
The use of selected references from various versions of the
Bible in this publication does not necessarily imply
publisher endorsement of the versions in their entirety.
ISBN: 978-1-881273-15-6

To Karolyn,
Shelley, and Derek

Other Great Books by Gary Chapman
The Five Love Languages Men’s Edition
The Five Love Languages Gift Edition
The Five Love Languages of Children
The Five Love Languages of Teenagers
The Five Love Languages for Singles
Your Gift of Love
Parenting Your Adult Child
The Other Side of Love
Loving Solutions
Five Signs of a Loving Family
Toward a Growing Marriage
Hope for the Separated
Covenant Marriage

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments
1. What Happens to Love After the Wedding?
2. Keeping the Love Tank Full
3. Falling in Love
4. Love Language #1: Words of Affirmation
5. Love Language #2: Quality Time
6. Love Language #3: Receiving Gifts
7. Love Language #4: Acts of Service
8. Love Language #5: Physical Touch
9. Discovering Your Primary Love Language
10. Love Is a Choice
11. Love Makes the Difference
12. Loving the Unlovely
13. Children and Love Languages
14. A Personal Word
The Five Love Languages Profile for Husbands

The Five Love Languages Profile for Wives

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Love begins, or should begin, at home. For me that
means Sam and Grace, Dad and Mom, who have loved me
for more than fifty years. Without them I would still be
seeking love instead of writing about it. Home also means
Karolyn, to whom I have been married for more than forty
years. If all wives loved as she does, fewer men would be
looking over the fence. Shelley and Derek are now out of
the nest, exploring new worlds, but I feel secure in the
warmth of their love. I am blessed and grateful.
I am indebted to a host of professionals who have
influenced my concepts of love. Among them are
psychiatrists Ross Campbell, Judson Swihart, and Scott
Peck. For editorial assistance, I am indebted to Debbie
Barr and Cathy Peterson. The technical expertise of Tricia
Kube and Don Schmidt made it possible to meet
publication deadlines. Last, and most important, I want to
express my gratitude to the hundreds of couples who, over
the past thirty years, have shared the intimate side of their
lives with me. This book is a tribute to their honesty.

chapter one

W H
HAT

APPENS TO

L A
OVE

FTER THE

W

?

EDDING

At 30,000 feet, somewhere between Buffalo and Dallas,
he put his magazine in his seat pocket, turned in my
direction, and asked, “What kind of work do you do?”
“I do marriage counseling and lead marriage
enrichment seminars,” I said matter-of-factly.
“I’ve been wanting to ask someone this for a long
time,” he said. “What happens to the love after you get
married?”
Relinquishing my hopes of getting a nap, I asked,
“What do you mean?”
“Well,” he said, “I’ve been married three times, and
each time, it was wonderful before we got married, but
somehow after the wedding it all fell apart. All the love I
thought I had for her and the love she seemed to have for
me evaporated. I am a fairly intelligent person. I operate a
successful business, but I don’t understand it.”
“How long were you married?” I asked.
“The first one lasted about ten years. The second time,
we were married three years, and the last one, almost six
years.”
“Did your love evaporate immediately after the

wedding, or was it a gradual loss?” I inquired.
“Well, the second one went wrong from the very
beginning. I don’t know what happened. I really thought we
loved each other, but the honeymoon was a disaster, and
we never recovered. We only dated six months. It was a
whirlwind romance. It was really exciting! But after the
marriage, it was a battle from the beginning.
“In my first marriage, we had three or four good years
before the baby came. After the baby was born, I felt like
she gave her attention to the baby and I no longer mattered.
It was as if her one goal in life was to have a baby, and after
the baby, she no longer needed me.”
“Did you tell her that?” I asked.
“Oh, yes, I told her. She said I was crazy. She said I did
not understand the stress of being a twenty-four-hour nurse.
She said I should be more understanding and help her
more. I really tried, but it didn’t seem to make any
difference. After that, we just grew further apart. After a
while, there was no love left, just deadness. Both of us
agreed that the marriage was over.
“My last marriage? I really thought that one would be
different. I had been divorced for three years. We dated
each other for two years. I really thought we knew what we
were doing, and I thought that perhaps for the first time I
really knew what it meant to love someone. I genuinely felt
that she loved me.
“After the wedding, I don’t think I changed. I continued
to express love to her as I had before marriage. I told her

how beautiful she was. I told her how much I loved her. I told
her how proud I was to be her husband. But a few months
after marriage, she started complaining; about petty things
at first—like my not taking the garbage out or not hanging
up my clothes. Later, she went to attacking my character,
telling me she didn’t feel she could trust me, accusing me of
not being faithful to her. She became a totally negative
person. Before marriage, she was never negative. She was
one of the most positive people I have ever met. That is one
of the things that attracted me to her. She never
complained about anything. Everything I did was wonderful,
but once we were married, it seemed I could do nothing
right. I honestly don’t know what happened. Eventually, I lost
my love for her and began to resent her. She obviously had
no love for me. We agreed there was no benefit to our living
together any longer, so we split.
“That was a year ago. So my question is, What
happens to love after the wedding? Is my experience
common? Is that why we have so many divorces in our
country? I can’t believe that it happened to me three times.
And those who don’t divorce, do they learn to live with the
emptiness, or does love really stay alive in some
marriages? If so, how?”

The questions my friend seated in 5A was asking are the
questions that thousands of married and divorced persons

are asking today. Some are asking friends, some are
asking counselors and clergy, and some are asking
themselves. Sometimes the answers are couched in
psychological research jargon that is almost
incomprehensible. Sometimes they are couched in humor
and folklore. Most of the jokes and pithy sayings contain
some truth, but they are like offering an aspirin to a person
with cancer.
The desire for romantic love in marriage is deeply
rooted in our psychological makeup. Almost every popular
magazine has at least one article each issue on keeping
love alive in a marriage. Books abound on the subject.
Television and radio talk shows deal with it. Keeping love
alive in our marriages is serious business.
With all the books, magazines, and practical help
available, why is it that so few couples seem to have found
the secret to keeping love alive after the wedding? Why is it
that a couple can attend a communication workshop, hear
wonderful ideas on how to enhance communication, return
home, and find themselves totally unable to implement the
communication patterns demonstrated? How is it that we
read a magazine article on “101 Ways to Express Love to
Your Spouse,” select two or three ways that seem
especially good to us, try them, and our spouse doesn’t
even acknowledge our effort? We give up on the other 98
ways and go back to life as usual.

We must be willing to learn our spouse’s primary love
language if we are to be effective communicators of love.

The answer to those questions is the purpose of this
book. It is not that the books and articles already published
are not helpful. The problem is that we have overlooked one
fundamental truth: People speak different love languages.
In the area of linguistics, there are major language
groups: Japanese, Chinese, Spanish, English, Portuguese,
Greek, German, French, and so on. Most of us grow up
learning the language of our parents and siblings, which
becomes our primary or native tongue. Later, we may learn
additional languages but usually with much more effort.
These become our secondary languages. We speak and
understand best our native language. We feel most
comfortable speaking that language. The more we use a
secondary language, the more comfortable we become
conversing in it. If we speak only our primary language and
encounter someone else who speaks only his or her
primary language, which is different from ours, our
communication will be limited. We must rely on pointing,
grunting, drawing pictures, or acting out our ideas. We can
communicate, but it is awkward. Language differences are
part and parcel of human culture. If we are to communicate
effectively across cultural lines, we must learn the language
of those with whom we wish to communicate.

In the area of love, it is similar. Your emotional love
language and the language of your spouse may be as
different as Chinese from English. No matter how hard you
try to express love in English, if your spouse understands
only Chinese, you will never understand how to love each
other. My friend on the plane was speaking the language of
“Affirming Words” to his third wife when he said, “I told her
how beautiful she was. I told her I loved her. I told her how
proud I was to be her husband.” He was speaking love, and
he was sincere, but she did not understand his language.
Perhaps she was looking for love in his behavior and didn’t
see it. Being sincere is not enough. We must be willing to
learn our spouse’s primary love language if we are to be
effective communicators of love.

My conclusion after thirty years of marriage counseling is
that there are basically five emotional love languages—five
ways that people speak and understand emotional love. In
the field of linguistics a language may have numerous
dialects or variations. Similarly, within the five basic
emotional love languages, there are many dialects. That
accounts for the magazine articles titled “10 Ways to Let
Your Spouse Know You Love Her,” “20 Ways to Keep Your
Man at Home,” or “365 Expressions of Marital Love.” There
are not 10, 20, or 365 basic love languages. In my opinion,
there are only five. However, there may be numerous

dialects. The number of ways to express love within a love
language is limited only by one’s imagination. The
important thing is to speak the love language of your
spouse.
We have long known that in early childhood
development each child develops unique emotional
patterns. Some children, for example, develop a pattern of
low self-esteem whereas others have healthy self-esteem.
Some develop emotional patterns of insecurity whereas
others grow up feeling secure. Some children grow up
feeling loved, wanted, and appreciated, yet others grow up
feeling unloved, unwanted, and unappreciated.
The children who feel loved by their parents and peers
will develop a primary emotional love language based on
their unique psychological makeup and the way their
parents and other significant persons expressed love to
them. They will speak and understand one primary love
language. They may later learn a secondary love language,
but they will always feel most comfortable with their primary
language. Children who do not feel loved by their parents
and peers will also develop a primary love language.
However, it will be somewhat distorted in much the same
way as some children may learn poor grammar and have
an underdeveloped vocabulary. That poor programming
does not mean they cannot become good communicators.
But it does mean they will have to work at it more diligently
than those who had a more positive model. Likewise,
children who grow up with an underdeveloped sense of

emotional love can also come to feel loved and to
communicate love, but they will have to work at it more
diligently than those who grew up in a healthy, loving
atmosphere.
Seldom do a husband and wife have the same primary
emotional love language. We tend to speak our primary
love language, and we become confused when our spouse
does not understand what we are communicating. We are
expressing our love, but the message does not come
through because we are speaking what, to them, is a
foreign language. Therein lies the fundamental problem,
and it is the purpose of this book to offer a solution. That is
why I dare to write another book on love. Once we discover
the five basic love languages and understand our own
primary love language, as well as the primary love
language of our spouse, we will then have the needed
information to apply the ideas in the books and articles.

Once you identify and learn to speak your spouse’s
primary love language, I believe that you will have
discovered the key to a long-lasting, loving marriage. Love
need not evaporate after the wedding, but in order to keep
it alive most of us will have to put forth the effort to learn a
secondary love language. We cannot rely on our native
tongue if our spouse does not understand it. If we want
him/her to feel the love we are trying to communicate, we

must express it in his or her primary love language.

chapter two

K

EEPING THE

L T F
OVE

ANK

ULL

Love is the most important word in the English language
—and the most confusing. Both secular and religious
thinkers agree that love plays a central role in life. We are
told that “love is a many-splendored thing” and that “love
makes the world go round.” Thousands of books, songs,
magazines, and movies are peppered with the word.
Numerous philosophical and theological systems have
made a prominent place for love. And the founder of the
Christian faith wanted love to be the distinguishing
characteristic of His followers.1
Psychologists have concluded that the need to feel
loved is a primary human emotional need. For love, we will
climb mountains, cross seas, traverse desert sands, and
endure untold hardships. Without love, mountains become
unclimbable, seas uncrossable, deserts unbearable, and
hardships our plight in life. The Christian apostle to the
Gentiles, Paul, exalted love when he indicated that all
human accomplishments that are not motivated by love are,
in the end, empty. He concluded that in the last scene of the
human drama, only three characters will remain: “faith, hope

and love. But the greatest of these is love.”2
If we can agree that the word love permeates human
society, both historically and in the present, we must also
agree that it is a most confusing word. We use it in a
thousand ways. We say, “I love hot dogs,” and in the next
breath, “I love my mother.” We speak of loving activities:
swimming, skiing, hunting. We love objects: food, cars,
houses. We love animals: dogs, cats, even pet snails. We
love nature: trees, grass, flowers, and weather. We love
people: mother, father, son, daughter, parents, wives,
husbands, friends. We even fall in love with love.
If all that is not confusing enough, we also use the word
love to explain behavior. “I did it because I love her.” That
explanation is given for all kinds of actions. A man is
involved in an adulterous relationship, and he calls it love.
The preacher, on the other hand, calls it sin. The wife of an
alcoholic picks up the pieces after her husband’s latest
episode. She calls it love, but the psychologist calls it
codependency. The parent indulges all the child’s wishes,
calling it love. The family therapist would call it irresponsible
parenting. What is loving behavior?

The purpose of this book is not to eliminate all confusion
surrounding the word love, but to focus on that kind of love
that is essential to our emotional health. Child
psychologists affirm that every child has certain basic

emotional needs that must be met if he is to be emotionally
stable. Among those emotional needs, none is more basic
than the need for love and affection, the need to sense that
he or she belongs and is wanted. With an adequate supply
of affection, the child will likely develop into a responsible
adult. Without that love, he or she will be emotionally and
socially retarded.
I liked the metaphor the first time I heard it: “Inside
every child is an ‘emotional tank’ waiting to be filled with
love. When a child really feels loved, he will develop
normally but when the love tank is empty, the child will
misbehave. Much of the misbehavior of children is
motivated by the cravings of an empty ‘love tank.’” I was
listening to Dr. Ross Campbell, a psychiatrist who
specializes in the treatment of children and adolescents.
As I listened, I thought of the hundreds of parents who
had paraded the misdeeds of their children through my
office. I had never visualized an empty love tank inside
those children, but I had certainly seen the results of it. Their
misbehavior was a misguided search for the love they did
not feel. They were seeking love in all the wrong places and
in all the wrong ways.
I remember Ashley, who at thirteen years of age was
being treated for a sexually transmitted disease. Her
parents were crushed. They were angry with Ashley. They
were upset with the school, which they blamed for teaching
her about sex. “Why would she do this?” they asked.

At the heart of mankind’s existence is the desire to be
intimate and to be loved by another. Marriage is designed
to meet that need for intimacy and love.
In my conversation with Ashley, she told me of her
parents’ divorce when she was six years old. “I thought my
father left because he didn’t love me,” she said. “When my
mother remarried when I was ten, I felt she now had
someone to love her, but I still had no one to love me. I
wanted so much to be loved. I met this boy at school. He
was older than me, but he liked me. I couldn’t believe it. He
was kind to me, and in a while I really felt he loved me. I
didn’t want to have sex, but I wanted to be loved.”
Ashley’s “love tank” had been empty for many years.
Her mother and stepfather had provided for her physical
needs but had not realized the deep emotional struggle
raging inside her. They certainly loved Ashley, and they
thought that she felt their love. Not until it was almost too
late did they discover that they were not speaking Ashley’s
primary love language.

The emotional need for love, however, is not simply a
childhood phenomenon. That need follows us into
adulthood and into marriage. The “in love” experience
temporarily meets that need, but it is inevitably a “quick fix”

and, as we shall learn later, has a limited and predictable
life span. After we come down from the high of the “in love”
obsession, the emotional need for love resurfaces because
it is fundamental to our nature. It is at the center of our
emotional desires. We needed love before we “fell in love,”
and we will need it as long as we live.
The need to feel loved by one’s spouse is at the heart
of marital desires. A man said to me recently, “What good
is the house, the cars, the place at the beach, or any of the
rest of it if your wife doesn’t love you?” Do you understand
what he was really saying? “More than anything, I want to be
loved by my wife.” Material things are no replacement for
human, emotional love. A wife says, “He ignores me all day
long and then wants to jump in bed with me. I hate it.” She is
not a wife who hates sex; she is a wife desperately
pleading for emotional love.
Something in our nature cries out to be loved by
another. Isolation is devastating to the human psyche. That
is why solitary confinement is considered the cruelest of
punishments. At the heart of mankind’s existence is the
desire to be intimate and to be loved by another. Marriage
is designed to meet that need for intimacy and love. That is
why the ancient biblical writings spoke of the husband and
wife becoming “one flesh.” That did not mean that
individuals would lose their identity; it meant that they would
enter into each other’s lives in a deep and intimate way.
The New Testament writers challenged both the husband
and the wife to love each other. From Plato to Peck, writers

have emphasized the importance of love in marriage.
But, if love is important, it is also elusive. I have
listened to many married couples share their secret pain.
Some came to me because the inner ache had become
unbearable. Others came because they realized that their
behavior patterns or the misbehavior of their spouse was
destroying the marriage. Some came simply to inform me
that they no longer wanted to be married. Their dreams of
“living happily ever after” had been dashed against the hard
walls of reality. Again and again I have heard the words
“Our love is gone, our relationship is dead. We used to feel
close, but not now. We no longer enjoy being with each
other. We don’t meet each other’s needs.” Their stories
bear testimony that adults as well as children have “love
tanks.”
Could it be that deep inside hurting couples exists an
invisible “emotional love tank” with its gauge on empty?
Could the misbehavior, withdrawal, harsh words, and
critical spirit occur because of that empty tank? If we could
find a way to fill it, could the marriage be reborn? With a full
tank would couples be able to create an emotional climate
where it is possible to discuss differences and resolve
conflicts? Could that tank be the key that makes marriage
work?

Those questions sent me on a long journey. Along the

way, I discovered the simple yet powerful insights
contained in this book. The journey has taken me not only
through thirty years of marriage counseling but into the
hearts and minds of hundreds of couples throughout
America. From Seattle to Miami, couples have invited me
into the inner chamber of their marriages, and we have
talked openly. The illustrations included in this book are cut
from the fabric of real life. Only names and places are
changed to protect the privacy of the individuals who have
spoken so freely.
I am convinced that keeping the emotional love tank full
is as important to a marriage as maintaining the proper oil
level is to an automobile. Running your marriage on an
empty “love tank” may cost you even more than trying to
drive your car without oil. What you are about to read has
the potential of saving thousands of marriages and can
even enhance the emotional climate of a good marriage.
Whatever the quality of your marriage now, it can always be
better.
WARNING: Understanding the five love languages and
learning to speak the primary love language of your spouse
may radically affect his or her behavior. People behave
differently when their emotional love tanks are full.

Before we examine the five love languages, however, we
must address one other important but confusing

phenomenon: the euphoric experience of “falling in love.”
NOTES

1. John 13:35.
2. 1 Corinthians 13:13.

chapter three

F

ALLING IN

L

OVE

She showed up at my office without an appointment and
asked my secretary if she could see me for five minutes. I
had known Janice for eighteen years. She was thirty-six
and had never married. She had dated several men
through the years, one for six years, another for three years,
and several others for shorter periods of time. From time to
time, she had made appointments with me to discuss a
particular difficulty in one of her relationships. She was by
nature a disciplined, conscientious, organized, thoughtful,
and caring person. It was completely out of character for
her to show up at my office unannounced. I thought, There

must be some terrible crisis for Janice to show up without
an appointment. I told my secretary to show her in, and I
fully expected to see her burst into tears and tell me some
tragic story as soon as the door was closed. Instead, she
virtually skipped into my office, beaming with excitement.
“How are you today, Janice?” I asked.
“Great!” she said. “I’ve never been better in my life. I’m
getting married!”
“You are?” I said, revealing my shock. “To whom and
when?”

“To David Gallespie,” she exclaimed, “in September.”
“That’s exciting. How long have you been dating?”
“Three weeks. I know it’s crazy, Dr. Chapman, after all
the people I have dated and the number of times I came so
close to getting married. I can’t believe it myself, but I know
David is the one for me. From the first date, we both knew
it. Of course, we didn’t talk about it on the first night, but one
week later, he asked me to marry him. I knew he was going
to ask me, and I knew I was going to say yes. I have never
felt this way before, Dr. Chapman. You know about the
relationships that I have had through the years and the
struggles I have had. In every relationship, something was
not right. I never felt at peace about marrying any of them,
but I know that David is the right one.”
By this time, Janice was rocking back and forth in her
chair, giggling and saying, “I know it’s crazy, but I am so
happy. I have never been this happy in my life.”
What has happened to Janice? She has fallen in love.
In her mind, David is the most wonderful man she has ever
met. He is perfect in every way. He will make the ideal
husband. She thinks about him day and night. The facts that
David has been married twice before, has three children,
and has had three jobs in the past year are trivial to Janice.
She’s happy, and she is convinced that she is going to be
happy forever with David. She is in love.

Most of us enter marriage by way of the “in love”
experience. We meet someone whose physical
characteristics and personality traits create enough
electrical shock to trigger our “love alert” system. The bells
go off, and we set in motion the process of getting to know
the person. The first step may be sharing a hamburger or
steak, depending on our budget, but our real interest is not
in the food. We are on a quest to discover love. “Could this
warm, tingly feeling I have inside be the ‘real’ thing?”
Sometimes we lose the tingles on the first date. We
find out that she dips snuff, and the tingles run right out our
toes; we want no more hamburgers with her. Other times,
however, the tingles are stronger after the hamburger than
before. We arrange for a few more “together” experiences,
and before long the level of intensity has increased to the
point where we find ourselves saying, “I think I’m falling in
love.” Eventually we are convinced that it is the “real thing,”
and we tell the other person, hoping the feeling is
reciprocal. If it isn’t, things cool off a bit or we redouble our
efforts to impress, and eventually win the love of, our
beloved. When it is reciprocal, we start talking about
marriage because everyone agrees that being “in love” is
the necessary foundation for a good marriage.

Our dreams before marriage are of marital bliss…. It’s
hard to believe anything else when you are in love.

At its peak, the “in love” experience is euphoric. We
are emotionally obsessed with each other. We go to sleep
thinking of one another. When we rise that person is the
first thought on our minds. We long to be together.
Spending time together is like playing in the anteroom of
heaven. When we hold hands, it seems as if our blood
flows together. We could kiss forever if we didn’t have to go
to school or work. Embracing stimulates dreams of
marriage and ecstasy.
The person who is “in love” has the illusion that his
beloved is perfect. His mother can see the flaws but he
can’t. His mother says, “Darling, have you considered she
has been under psychiatric care for five years?” But he
replies, “Oh, Mother, give me a break. She’s been out for
three months now.” His friends also can see the flaws but
are not likely to tell him unless he asks, and chances are he
won’t because in his mind she is perfect and what others
think doesn’t matter.
Our dreams before marriage are of marital bliss: “We
are going to make each other supremely happy. Other
couples may argue and fight, but not us. We love each
other.” Of course, we are not totally naive. We know
intellectually that we will eventually have differences. But we
are certain that we will discuss those differences openly;
one of us will always be willing to make concessions, and
we will reach agreement. It’s hard to believe anything else

when you are in love.
We have been led to believe that if we are really in
love, it will last forever. We will always have the wonderful
feelings that we have at this moment. Nothing could ever
come between us. Nothing will ever overcome our love for
each other. We are enamored and caught up in the beauty
and charm of the other’s personality. Our love is the most
wonderful thing we have ever experienced. We observe
that some married couples seem to have lost that feeling,
but it will never happen to us. “Maybe they did not have the
real thing,” we reason.

Unfortunately, the eternality of the “in love” experience is
fiction, not fact. Dr. Dorothy Tennov, a psychologist, has
done long-range studies on the in-love phenomenon. After
studying scores of couples, she concluded that the average
life span of a romantic obsession is two years. If it is a
secretive love affair, it may last a little longer. Eventually,
however, we all descend from the clouds and plant our feet
on earth again. Our eyes are opened, and we see the warts
of the other person. We recognize that some of his/her
personality traits are actually irritating. Her behavior
patterns are annoying. He has the capacity for hurt and
anger, perhaps even harsh words and critical judgments.
Those little traits that we overlooked when we were in love
now become huge mountains. We remember Mother’s

words and ask ourselves, How could I have been so

foolish?
Welcome to the real world of marriage, where hairs
are always on the sink and little white spots cover the
mirror, where arguments center on which way the toilet
paper comes off and whether the lid should be up or down.
It is a world where shoes do not walk to the closet and
drawers do not close themselves, where coats do not like
hangers and socks go AWOL during laundry. In this world,
a look can hurt and a word can crush. Intimate lovers can
become enemies, and marriage a battlefield.
What happened to the “in love” experience? Alas, it
was but an illusion by which we were tricked into signing
our names on the dotted line, for better or for worse. No
wonder so many have come to curse marriage and the
partner whom they once loved. After all, if we were
deceived, we have a right to be angry. Did we really have
the “real” thing? I think so. The problem was faulty
information.
The bad information was the idea that the “in love”
obsession would last forever. We should have known
better. A casual observation should have taught us that if
people remained obsessed, we would all be in serious
trouble. The shock waves would rumble through business,
industry, church, education, and the rest of society. Why?
Because people who are “in love” lose interest in other
pursuits. That is why we call it “obsession.” The college
student who falls head over heels in love sees his grades

tumbling. It is difficult to study when you are in love.
Tomorrow you have a test on the War of 1812, but who
cares about the War of 1812? When you’re in love,
everything else seems irrelevant. A man said to me, “Dr.
Chapman, my job is disintegrating.”
“What do you mean?” I asked.
“I met this girl, fell in love, and I can’t get a thing done. I
can’t keep my mind on my job. I spend my day dreaming
about her.”
The euphoria of the “in love” state gives us the illusion
that we have an intimate relationship. We feel that we
belong to each other. We believe we can conquer all
problems. We feel altruistic toward each other. As one
young man said about his fiancée, “I can’t conceive of
doing anything to hurt her. My only desire is to make her
happy. I would do anything to make her happy.” Such
obsession gives us the false sense that our egocentric
attitudes have been eradicated and we have become sort
of a Mother Teresa, willing to give anything for the benefit of
our lover. The reason we can do that so freely is that we
sincerely believe that our lover feels the same way toward
us. We believe that she is committed to meeting our needs,
that he loves us as much as we love him and would never
do anything to hurt us.
That thinking is always fanciful. Not that we are
insincere in what we think and feel, but we are unrealistic.
We fail to reckon with the reality of human nature. By nature,
we are egocentric. Our world revolves around us. None of

us is totally altruistic. The euphoria of the “in love”
experience only gives us that illusion.
Once the experience of falling in love has run its natural
course (remember, the average in-love experience lasts
two years), we will return to the world of reality and begin to
assert ourselves. He will express his desires, but his
desires will be different from hers. He desires sex, but she
is too tired. He wants to buy a new car, but she says,
“That’s absurd!” She wants to visit her parents, but he says,
“I don’t like spending so much time with your family.” He
wants to play in the softball tournament, and she says, “You
love softball more than you love me.” Little by little, the
illusion of intimacy evaporates, and the individual desires,
emotions, thoughts, and behavior patterns exert
themselves. They are two individuals. Their minds have not
melded together, and their emotions mingled only briefly in
the ocean of love. Now the waves of reality begin to
separate them. They fall out of love, and at that point either
they withdraw, separate, divorce, and set off in search of a
new in-love experience, or they begin the hard work of
learning to love each other without the euphoria of the inlove obsession.

The in-love experience does not focus on our own growth
nor on the growth and development of the other person.
Rather, it gives us the sense that we have arrived.

Some researchers, among them psychiatrist M. Scott
Peck and psychologist Dorothy Tennov, have concluded
that the in-love experience should not be called “love” at all.
Dr. Tennov coined the word limerance for the in-love
experience in order to distinguish that experience from
what she considers real love. Dr. Peck concludes that the
falling-in-love experience is not real love for three reasons.
First, falling in love is not an act of the will or a conscious
choice. No matter how much we may want to fall in love, we
cannot make it happen. On the other hand, we may not be
seeking the experience when it overtakes us. Often, we fall
in love at inopportune times and with unlikely people.
Second, falling in love is not real love because it is
effortless. Whatever we do in the in-love state requires little
discipline or conscious effort on our part. The long,
expensive phone calls we make to each other, the money
we spend traveling to see each other, the gifts we give, the
work projects we do are as nothing to us. As the instinctual
nature of the bird dictates the building of a nest, so the
instinctual nature of the in-love experience pushes us to do
outlandish and unnatural things for each other.
Third, one who is “in love” is not genuinely interested in
fostering the personal growth of the other person. “If we
have any purpose in mind when we fall in love it is to
terminate our own loneliness and perhaps ensure this result
through marriage.”1 The in-love experience does not focus
on our own growth nor on the growth and development of

the other person. Rather, it gives us the sense that we have
arrived and that we do not need further growth. We are at
the apex of life’s happiness, and our only desire is to stay
there. Certainly our beloved does not need to grow
because she is perfect. We simply hope she will remain
perfect.

If falling in love is not real love, what is it? Dr. Peck
concludes that it “is a genetically determined instinctual
component of mating behavior. In other words, the
temporary collapse of ego boundaries that constitutes
falling in love is a stereotypic response of human beings to
a configuration of internal sexual drives and external sexual
stimuli, which serves to increase the probability of sexual
pairing and bonding so as to enhance the survival of the
species.”2
Whether or not we agree with that conclusion, those of
us who have fallen in love and out of love will likely agree
that the experience does catapult us into emotional orbit
unlike anything else we have experienced. It tends to
disengage our reasoning abilities, and we often find
ourselves doing and saying things that we would never
have done in more sober moments. In fact, when we come
down from the emotional obsession we often wonder why
we did those things. When the wave of emotions subsides
and we come back to the real world where our differences

are illuminated, how many of us have asked, “Why did we
get married? We don’t agree on anything.” Yet, at the
height of the in-loveness, we thought we agreed on
everything—at least everything that was important.

Rational, volitional love…is the kind of love to which the
sages have always called us.
Does that mean that having been tricked into marriage
by the illusion of being in love, we are now faced with two
options: (1) we are destined to a life of misery with our
spouse, or (2) we must jump ship and try again? Our
generation has opted for the latter, whereas an earlier
generation often chose the former. Before we automatically
conclude that we have made the better choice, perhaps we
should examine the data. Presently 40 percent of first
marriages in this country end in divorce. Sixty percent of
second marriages and 75 percent of third marriages end
the same way. Apparently the prospect of a happier
marriage the second and third time around is not
substantial.
Research seems to indicate that there is a third and
better alternative: We can recognize the in-love experience
for what it was—a temporary emotional high—and now
pursue “real love” with our spouse. That kind of love is
emotional in nature but not obsessional. It is a love that

unites reason and emotion. It involves an act of the will and
requires discipline, and it recognizes the need for personal
growth. Our most basic emotional need is not to fall in love
but to be genuinely loved by another, to know a love that
grows out of reason and choice, not instinct. I need to be
loved by someone who chooses to love me, who sees in
me something worth loving.
That kind of love requires effort and discipline. It is the
choice to expend energy in an effort to benefit the other
person, knowing that if his or her life is enriched by your
effort, you too will find a sense of satisfaction—the
satisfaction of having genuinely loved another. It does not
require the euphoria of the “in love” experience. In fact, true
love cannot begin until the “in love” experience has run its
course.
We cannot take credit for the kind and generous things
we do while under the influence of “the obsession.” We are
pushed and carried along by an instinctual force that goes
beyond our normal behavior patterns. But if, once we return
to the real world of human choice, we choose to be kind
and generous, that is real love.
The emotional need for love must be met if we are to
have emotional health. Married adults long to feel affection
and love from their spouses. We feel secure when we are
assured that our mate accepts us, wants us, and is
committed to our well-being. During the in-love stage, we
felt all of those emotions. It was heavenly while it lasted. Our
mistake was in thinking it would last forever.

But that obsession was not meant to last forever. In the
textbook of marriage, it is but the introduction. The heart of
the book is rational, volitional love. That is the kind of love
to which the sages have always called us. It is intentional.
That is good news to the married couple who have lost
all of their “in love” feelings. If love is a choice, then they
have the capacity to love after the “in love” obsession has
died and they have returned to the real world. That kind of
love begins with an attitude—a way of thinking. Love is the
attitude that says, “I am married to you, and I choose to look
out for your interests.” Then the one who chooses to love
will find appropriate ways to express that decision.
“But it seems so sterile,” some may contend. “Love as
an attitude with appropriate behavior? Where are the
shooting stars, the balloons, the deep emotions? What
about the spirit of anticipation, the twinkle of the eye, the
electricity of a kiss, the excitement of sex? What about the
emotional security of knowing that I am number one in
his/her mind?” That is what this book is all about. How do
we meet each other’s deep, emotional need to feel loved?
If we can learn that and choose to do it, then the love we
share will be exciting beyond anything we ever felt when we
were infatuated.

For many years now, I have discussed the five emotional
love languages in my marriage seminars and in private

counseling sessions. Thousands of couples will attest to the
validity of what you are about to read. My files are filled with
letters from people whom I have never met, saying, “A
friend loaned me one of your tapes on love languages, and
it has revolutionized our marriage. We had struggled for
years trying to love each other, but our efforts had missed
each other emotionally. Now that we are speaking the
appropriate love languages, the emotional climate of our
marriage has radically improved.”
When your spouse’s emotional love tank is full and he
feels secure in your love, the whole world looks bright and
your spouse will move out to reach his highest potential in
life. But when the love tank is empty and he feels used but
not loved, the whole world looks dark and he will likely never
reach his potential for good in the world. In the next five
chapters, I will explain the five emotional love languages
and then, in chapter 9, illustrate how discovering your
spouse’s primary love language can make your efforts at
love most productive.
NOTES

1. M. Scott Peck, The Road Less Traveled(New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1978), pp. 89–90.
2. Ibid., p. 90.

chapter four

Love Language #1

W

ORDS OF

A

FFIRMATION

Mark Twain once said, “I can live for two months on a
good compliment.” If we take Twain literally, six
compliments a year would have kept his emotional love
tank at the operational level. Your spouse will probably
need more.
One way to express love emotionally is to use words
that build up. Solomon, author of the ancient Hebrew
wisdom literature, wrote, “The tongue has the power of life
and death.”1 Many couples have never learned the
tremendous power of verbally affirming each other.
Solomon further noted, “An anxious heart weighs a man
down, but a kind word cheers him up.”2
Verbal compliments, or words of appreciation, are
powerful communicators of love. They are best expressed
in simple, straightforward statements of affirmation, such
as:
“You look sharp in that suit.”
“Do you ever look nice in that dress! Wow!”
“You must be the best potato cook in the world. I love

these potatoes.”
“I really appreciate your washing the dishes tonight.”
“Thanks for getting the baby-sitter lined up tonight. I
want you to know I don’t take that for granted.”
“I really appreciate your taking the garbage out.”
What would happen to the emotional climate of a
marriage if the husband and wife heard such words of
affirmation regularly?

Several years ago, I was sitting in my office with my door
open.
A lady walking down the hall said, “Have you got a
minute?”
“Sure, come in.”
She sat down and said, “Dr. Chapman, I’ve got a
problem. I can’t get my husband to paint our bedroom. I
have been after him for nine months. I have tried everything
I know, and I can’t get him to paint it.”
My first thought was, Lady, you are at the wrong place.
I am not a paint contractor. But I said, “Tell me about it.”
She said, “Well, last Saturday was a good example.
You remember how pretty it was? Do you know what my
husband did all day long? He washed and waxed the car.”
“So what did you do?”
“I went out there and said, ‘Bob, I don’t understand you.
Today would have been a perfect day to paint the bedroom,

and here you are washing and waxing the car.’”
“So did he paint the bedroom?” I inquired.
“No. It’s still not painted. I don’t know what to do.”
“Let me ask you a question,” I said. “Are you opposed
to clean, waxed cars?”
“No, but I want the bedroom painted.”
“Are you certain that your husband knows that you want
the bedroom painted?”
“I know he does,” she said. “I have been after him for
nine months.”
“Let me ask you one more question. Does your
husband ever do anything good?”
“Like what?”
“Oh, like taking the garbage out, or getting bugs off the
windshield of the car you drive, or putting gas in the car, or
paying the electric bill, or hanging up his coat?”
“Yes,” she said, “he does some of those things.”
“Then I have two suggestions. One, don’t ever mention
painting the bedroom again.” I repeated, “Don’t ever
mention it again.”
“I don’t see how that’s going to help,” she said.

The object of love is not getting something you want but
doing something for the well-being of the one you love. It
is a fact, however, that when we receive affirming words we
are far more likely to be motivated to reciprocate.

“Look, you just told me that he knows that you want the
bedroom painted. You don’t have to tell him anymore. He
already knows. The second suggestion I have is that the
next time your husband does anything good, give him a
verbal compliment. If he takes the garbage out, say, ‘Bob, I
want you to know that I really appreciate your taking the
garbage out.’ Don’t say, ‘About time you took the garbage
out. The flies were going to carry it out for you.’ If you see
him paying the electric bill, put your hand on his shoulder
and say, ‘Bob, I really appreciate your paying the electric
bill. I hear there are husbands who don’t do that, and I want
you to know how much I appreciate it.’ Every time he does
anything good, give him a verbal compliment.”
“I don’t see how that’s going to get the bedroom
painted.”
I said, “You asked for my advice. You have it. It’s free.”
She wasn’t very happy with me when she left. Three
weeks later, however, she came back to my office and
said, “It worked!” She had learned that verbal compliments
are far greater motivators than nagging words.
I am not suggesting verbal flattery in order to get your
spouse to do something you want. The object of love is not
getting something you want but doing something for the
well-being of the one you love. It is a fact, however, that
when we receive affirming words we are far more likely to
be motivated to reciprocate and do something our spouse
desires.

E

NCOURAGING

W

ORDS

Giving verbal compliments is only one way to express
words of affirmation to your spouse. Another dialect is
encouraging words. The word encourage means “to inspire
courage.” All of us have areas in which we feel insecure.
We lack courage, and that lack of courage often hinders us
from accomplishing the positive things that we would like to
do. The latent potential within your spouse in his or her
areas of insecurity may await your encouraging words.

Allison had always liked to write. Late in her college
career, she took a few courses in journalism. She quickly
realized that her excitement about writing exceeded her
interest in history, which had been her academic major. It
was too late to change majors, but after college and
especially before the first baby, she wrote several articles.
She submitted one article to a magazine, but when she
received a rejection slip, she never had the courage to
submit another. Now that the children were older and she
had more time to contemplate, Allison was again writing.
Keith, Allison’s husband, had paid little attention to
Allison’s writing in the early days of their marriage. He was
busy with his own vocation and caught up in the pressure of
climbing the corporate ladder. In time, however, Keith had

realized that life’s deepest meaning is not found in
accomplishments but in relationships. He had learned to
give more attention to Allison and her interests. So it was
quite natural one night for him to pick up one of Allison’s
articles and read it. When he finished, he went into the den
where Allison was reading a book. With great enthusiasm,
he said, “I hate to interrupt your reading, but I have to tell
you this. I just finished reading your article on ‘Making the
Most of the Holidays.’ Allison, you are an excellent writer.
This stuff ought to be published! You write clearly. Your
words paint pictures that I can visualize. You have a
fascinating style. You have to submit this stuff to some
magazines.”
“Do you really think so?” Allison asked hesitantly.
“I know so,” Keith said. “I’m telling you, this is good.”
When Keith left the room, Allison did not resume her
reading. With the closed book in her lap, she dreamed for
thirty minutes about what Keith had said. She wondered if
others would view her writing the same way he did. She
remembered the rejection slip she had received years ago,
but she reasoned that she was a different person now. Her
writing was better. She had had more experiences. Before
she left the chair to get a drink of water, Allison had made a
decision. She would submit her articles to some
magazines. She would see if they could be published.
Keith’s encouraging words were spoken fourteen
years ago. Allison has had numerous articles published
since then and now has a book contract. She is an

excellent writer, but it took the encouraging words from her
husband to inspire her to take the first step in the arduous
process of getting an article published.

Perhaps your spouse has untapped potential in one or
more areas of life. That potential may be awaiting your
encouraging words. Perhaps she needs to enroll in a
course to develop that potential. Maybe he needs to meet
some people who have succeeded in that area, who can
give him insight on the next step he needs to take. Your
words may give your spouse the courage necessary to take
that first step.
Please note that I am not talking about pressuring your
spouse to do something that you want. I am talking about
encouraging him to develop an interest that he already has.
For example, some husbands pressure their wives to lose
weight. The husband says, “I am encouraging her,” but to
the wife it sounds like condemnation. Only when a person
wants to lose weight can you give her encouragement. Until
she has the desire, your words will fall into the category of
preaching. Such words seldom encourage. They are
almost always heard as words of judgment, designed to
stimulate guilt. They express not love but rejection.

Encouragement requires empathy and seeing the world
from your spouse’s perspective. We must first learn what

is important to our spouse.
If, however, your spouse says, “I think I would like to
enroll in a weight-loss program this fall,” then you have
opportunity to give words of encouragement. Encouraging
words would sound like this. “If you decide to do that, I can
tell you one thing. You will be a success. That’s one of the
things I like about you. When you set your mind to
something, you do it. If that’s what you want to do, I will
certainly do everything I can to help you. And don’t worry
about the cost of the program. If it’s what you want to do,
we’ll find the money.” Such words may give your spouse the
courage to phone the weight-loss center.
Encouragement requires empathy and seeing the
world from your spouse’s perspective. We must first learn
what is important to our spouse. Only then can we give
encouragement. With verbal encouragement, we are trying
to communicate, “I know. I care. I am with you. How can I
help?” We are trying to show that we believe in him and in
his abilities. We are giving credit and praise.
Most of us have more potential than we will ever
develop. What holds us back is often courage. A loving
spouse can supply that all-important catalyst. Of course,
encouraging words may be difficult for you to speak. It may
not be your primary love language. It may take great effort
for you to learn this second language. That will be
especially true if you have a pattern of critical and

condemning words, but I can assure you that it will be worth
the effort.

K W
IND

ORDS

Love is kind. If then we are to communicate love
verbally, we must use kind words. That has to do with the
way we speak. The same sentence can have two different
meanings, depending on how you say it. The statement “I
love you,” when said with kindness and tenderness, can be
a genuine expression of love. But what about the statement
“I love you?” The question mark changes the whole
meaning of those three words. Sometimes our words are
saying one thing, but our tone of voice is saying another.
We are sending double messages. Our spouse will usually
interpret our message based on our tone of voice, not the
words we use.
“I would be delighted to wash dishes tonight,” said in a
snarling tone will not be received as an expression of love.
On the other hand, we can share hurt, pain, and even anger
in a kind manner, and that will be an expression of love. “I
felt disappointed and hurt that you didn’t offer to help me
this evening,” said in an honest, kind manner can be an
expression of love. The person speaking wants to be
known by her spouse. She is taking steps to build intimacy
by sharing her feelings. She is asking for an opportunity to
discuss a hurt in order to find healing. The same words

expressed with a loud, harsh voice will be not an
expression of love but an expression of condemnation and
judgment.
The manner in which we speak is exceedingly
important. An ancient sage once said, “A soft answer turns
away anger.” When your spouse is angry and upset and
lashing out words of heat, if you choose to be loving you will
not reciprocate with additional heat but with a soft voice.
You will receive what he is saying as information about his
emotional feelings. You will let him tell you of his hurt, anger,
and perception of events. You will seek to put yourself in his
shoes and see the event through his eyes and then express
softly and kindly your understanding of why he feels that
way. If you have wronged him, you will be willing to confess
the wrong and ask forgiveness. If your motivation is
different from what he is reading, you will be able to explain
your motivation kindly. You will seek understanding and
reconciliation, and not to prove your own perception as the
only logical way to interpret what has happened. That is
mature love—love to which we aspire if we seek a growing
marriage.
Love doesn’t keep a score of wrongs. Love doesn’t
bring up past failures. None of us is perfect. In marriage we
do not always do the best or right thing. We have
sometimes done and said hurtful things to our spouses. We
cannot erase the past. We can only confess it and agree
that it was wrong. We can ask for forgiveness and try to act
differently in the future. Having confessed my failure and

asked forgiveness, I can do nothing more to mitigate the
hurt it may have caused my spouse. When I have been
wronged by my spouse and she has painfully confessed it
and requested forgiveness, I have the option of justice or
forgiveness. If I choose justice and seek to pay her back or
make her pay for her wrongdoing, I am making myself the
judge and her the felon. Intimacy becomes impossible. If,
however, I choose to forgive, intimacy can be restored.
Forgiveness is the way of love.

I am amazed by how many individuals mess up every new
day with yesterday. They insist on bringing into today the
failures of yesterday and in so doing, they pollute a
potentially wonderful day. “I can’t believe you did it. I don’t
think I’ll ever forget it. You can’t possibly know how much
you hurt me. I don’t know how you can sit there so smugly
after you treated me that way. You ought to be crawling on
your knees, begging me for forgiveness. I don’t know if I
can ever forgive you.” Those are not the words of love but of
bitterness and resentment and revenge.

If we are to develop an intimate relationship, we need to
know each other’s desires. If we wish to love each other, we
need to know what the other person wants.

The best thing we can do with the failures of the past is
to let them be history. Yes, it happened. Certainly it hurt.
And it may still hurt, but he has acknowledged his failure
and asked your forgiveness. We cannot erase the past, but
we can accept it as history. We can choose to live today
free from the failures of yesterday. Forgiveness is not a
feeling; it is a commitment. It is a choice to show mercy, not
to hold the offense up against the offender. Forgiveness is
an expression of love. “I love you. I care about you, and I
choose to forgive you. Even though my feelings of hurt may
linger, I will not allow what has happened to come between
us. I hope that we can learn from this experience. You are
not a failure because you have failed. You are my spouse,
and together we will go on from here.” Those are the words
of affirmation expressed in the dialect of kind words.

H

UMBLE

W

ORDS

Love makes requests, not demands. When I demand
things from my spouse, I become a parent and she the
child. It is the parent who tells the three-year-old what he
ought to do and, in fact, what he must do. That is necessary
because the three-year-old does not yet know how to
navigate in the treacherous waters of life. In marriage,
however, we are equal, adult partners. We are not perfect
to be sure, but we are adults and we are partners. If we are
to develop an intimate relationship, we need to know each

other’s desires. If we wish to love each other, we need to
know what the other person wants.
The way we express those desires, however, is allimportant. If they come across as demands, we have
erased the possibility of intimacy and will drive our spouse
away. If, however, we make known our needs and desires
as requests, we are giving guidance, not ultimatums. The
husband who says, “You know those apple pies you make?
Would it be possible for you to make one this week? I love
those apple pies,” is giving his wife guidance on how to
love him and thus build intimacy. On the other hand, the
husband who says, “Haven’t had an apple pie since the
baby was born. Don’t guess I’ll get any more apple pies for
eighteen years,” has ceased being an adult and has
reverted to adolescent behavior. Such demands do not
build intimacy. The wife who says, “Do you think it will be
possible for you to clean the gutters this weekend?” is
expressing love by making a request. But the wife who
says, “If you don’t get those gutters cleaned out soon, they
are going to fall off the house. They already have trees
growing out of them!” has ceased to love and has become
a domineering spouse.
When you make a request of your spouse, you are
affirming his or her worth and abilities. You are in essence
indicating that she has something or can do something that
is meaningful and worthwhile to you. When, however, you
make demands, you have become not a lover but a tyrant.
Your spouse will feel not affirmed but belittled. A request

introduces the element of choice. Your mate may choose to
respond to your request or to deny it, because love is
always a choice. That’s what makes it meaningful. To know
that my spouse loves me enough to respond to one of my
requests communicates emotionally that she cares about
me, respects me, admires me, and wants to do something
to please me. We cannot get emotional love by way of
demand. My spouse may in fact comply with my demands,
but it is not an expression of love. It is an act of fear or guilt
or some other emotion, but not love. Thus, a request
creates the possibility for an expression of love, whereas a
demand suffocates that possibility.

V

ARIOUS

D

IALECTS

Words of affirmation are one of the five basic love
languages. Within that language, however, there are many
dialects. We have discussed a few already, and there are
many more. Entire volumes and numerous articles have
been written on these dialects. All of the dialects have in
common the use of words to affirm one’s spouse.
Psychologist William James said that possibly the deepest
human need is the need to feel appreciated. Words of
affirmation will meet that need in many individuals. If you
are not a man or woman of words, if it is not your primary
love language but you think it may be the love language of
your spouse, let me suggest that you keep a notebook titled

“Words of Affirmation.” When you read an article or book
on love, record the words of affirmation you find. When you
hear a lecture on love or you overhear a friend saying
something positive about another person, write it down. In
time, you will collect quite a list of words to use in
communicating love to your spouse.
You may also want to try giving indirect words of
affirmation, that is, saying positive things about your
spouse when he or she is not present. Eventually, someone
will tell your spouse, and you will get full credit for love. Tell
your wife’s mother how great your wife is. When her mother
tells her what you said, it will be amplified, and you will get
even more credit. Also affirm your spouse in front of others
when he or she is present. When you are given public honor
for an accomplishment, be sure to share the credit with your
spouse. You may also try your hand at writing words of
affirmation. Written words have the benefit of being read
over and over again.

I learned an important lesson about words of affirmation
and love languages in Little Rock, Arkansas. My visit with
Bill and Betty Jo was on a beautiful spring day. They lived in
a cluster home with white picket fence, green grass, and
spring flowers in full bloom. It was idyllic. Once inside,
however, I discovered that the idealism ended. Their
marriage was in shambles. Twelve years and two children

after the wedding day, they wondered why they had married
in the first place. They seemed to disagree on everything.
The only thing they really agreed on was that they both
loved the children. As the story unraveled, my observation
was that Bill was a workaholic who had little time left over
for Betty Jo. Betty Jo worked part-time, mainly to get out of
the house. Their method of coping was withdrawal. They
tried to put distance between themselves so that their
conflicts would not seem as large. But the gauge on both
love tanks read “empty.”
They told me that they had been going for marriage
counseling but didn’t seem to be making much progress.
They were attending my marriage seminar, and I was
leaving town the next day. This would likely be my only
encounter with Bill and Betty Jo. I decided to put all my
eggs in one basket.
I spent an hour with each of them separately. I listened
intently to both stories. I discovered that in spite of the
emptiness of their relationship and their many
disagreements, they appreciated certain things about each
other. Bill acknowledged, “She is a good mother. She also
is a good housekeeper and an excellent cook when she
chooses to cook. But,” he continued, “there is simply no
affection coming from her. I work my butt off and there is
simply no appreciation.” In my conversation with Betty Jo,
she agreed that Bill was an excellent provider. “But,” she
complained, “he does nothing around the house to help me,
and he never has time for me. What’s the use of having the

house, the recreational vehicle, and all the other things if
you don’t ever get to enjoy them together?”
With that information, I decided to focus my advice by
making only one suggestion to each of them. I told Bill and
Betty Jo separately that each one held the key to changing
the emotional climate of the marriage. “That key,” I said, “is
to express verbal appreciation for the things you like about
the other person and, for the moment, suspending your
complaints about the things you do not like.” We reviewed
the positive comments they had already made about each
other and helped each of them write a list of those positive
traits. Bill’s list focused on Betty Jo’s activities as a mother,
housekeeper, and cook. Betty Jo’s list focused on Bill’s
hard work and financial provision of the family. We made
the lists as specific as possible. Betty Jo’s list looked like
this:
He hasn’t missed a day of work in twelve years.
He is aggressive in his work.
He has received several promotions through the
years. He is always thinking of ways to improve
his productivity.
He makes the house payment each month.
He also pays the electrical bill, the gas bill, the
water bill.

He bought us a recreational vehicle three years
ago.
He mows the grass or hires someone to do it
each week in the spring and summer.
He rakes the leaves or hires someone to do it in
the fall.
He provides plenty of money for food and
clothing for the family.
He carries the garbage out about once a month.
He provides money for me to buy Christmas
presents for the family.
He agrees that I can use the money I make at my
part-time job any way I desire.
Bill’s list looked like this:
She makes the beds every day.
She vacuums the house every week.
She gets the kids off to school every morning

with a good breakfast.
She cooks dinner about three days a week.
She buys the groceries.
She helps the children with their homework.
She transports the children to school and church
activities.
She teaches first grade Sunday school.
She takes my clothes to the cleaners.
She does the washing and some ironing.
I suggested that they add to the lists things they
noticed in the weeks ahead. I also suggested that twice a
week, they select one positive trait and express verbal
appreciation for it to the spouse. I gave one further
guideline. I told Betty Jo that if Bill happened to give her a
compliment, she was not to give him a compliment at the
same time but rather, she should simply receive it and say,
“Thank you for saying that.” I told Bill the same thing. I
encouraged them to do that every week for two months,
and if they found it helpful, they could continue. If the
experiment did not help the emotional climate of the

marriage, then they could write it off as another failed
attempt.
The next day, I got on the plane and returned home. I
made a note to call Bill and Betty Jo two months later to
see what had happened. When I called them in midsummer, I asked to speak to each of them individually. I
was amazed to find that Bill’s attitude had taken a giant
step forward. He had guessed that I had given Betty Jo the
same advice I had given him, but that was all right. He loved
it. She was expressing appreciation for his hard work and
his provision for the family. “She has actually made me feel
like a man again. We’ve got a ways to go, Dr. Chapman,
but I really believe we are on the road.”
When I talked to Betty Jo, however, I found that she
had only taken a baby step forward. She said, “It has
improved some, Dr. Chapman. Bill is giving me verbal
compliments as you suggested, and I guess he is sincere.
But, Dr. Chapman, he’s still not spending any time with me.
He is still so busy at work that we never have time
together.”
As I listened to Betty Jo, the lights came on. I knew that
I had made a significant discovery. The love language of
one person is not necessarily the love language of another.
It was obvious that Bill’s primary love language was Words
of Affirmation. He was a hard worker, and he enjoyed his
work, but what he wanted most from his wife was
expressions of appreciation for his work. That pattern was
probably set in childhood, and the need for verbal

affirmation was no less important in his adult life. Betty Jo,
on the other hand, was emotionally crying out for something
else. Positive words were fine, but her deep emotional
longing is for something else. That brings us to love
language number two.
NOTES

1. Proverbs 18:21.
2. Proverbs 12:25.

If your spouse’s love language is Words of Affirmation:
1. To remind yourself that “Words of Affirmation” is
your spouse’s primary love language, print the
following on a 3x5 card and put it on a mirror or other
place where you will see it daily:
Words are important!
Words are important!
Words are important!
2. For one week, keep a written record of all the words
of affirmation you give your spouse each day. At the
end of the week, sit down with your spouse and review
your record.
On Monday, I said:
“You did a great job on this meal.”
“You really look nice in that outfit.”
“I really appreciate your picking up the laundry.”
On Tuesday, I said:
etc.

You might be surprised how well (or how poorly) you
are speaking words of affirmation.
1. Set a goal to give your spouse a different
compliment each day for one month. If “an apple a day
keeps the doctor away,” maybe a compliment a day
will keep the counselor away. (You may want to record
these compliments also, so you will not duplicate the
statements.)
2. As you read the newspaper, magazines, and
books, or watch TV or listen to radio, look for words of
affirmation which people use. Observe people in
conversation. Write those affirming statements in a
notebook. (If they are cartoons, clip and paste them in
your notebook.) Read through these periodically and
select those you could use with your spouse. When you
use one, note the date on which you used it. Your
notebook may become your love book. Remember,
words are important!
3. Write a love letter, a love paragraph, or a love
sentence to your spouse, and give it quietly or with
fanfare! (Chances are, when he dies, you will find your
love letter tucked away in some special place.) Words
are important!

4. Compliment your spouse in the presence of his
parents or friends. You will get double credit: Your
spouse will feel loved and the parents will feel lucky to
have such a great son-in-law or daughter-in-law.
5. Look for your spouse’s strengths and tell her how
much you appreciate those strengths. Chances are
she will work hard to live up to her reputation.
6. Tell your children how great their mother or father
is. Do this behind your spouse’s back and in her
presence.
7. Write a poem describing how you feel about your
spouse. If you are not a poet, choose a card that
expresses how you feel. Underline special words and
add a few of your own at the end.
8. If you find speaking “Words of Affirmation” is
difficult for you, practice in front of a mirror. Use a cue
card if you must, and remember, words are important.

chapter five

Love Language #2

Q

UALITY

T

IME

I should have picked up on Betty Jo’s primary love
language from the beginning. What was she saying on that
spring night when I visited her and Bill in Little Rock? “Bill is
a good provider, but he doesn’t spend any time with me.
What good is the house and the recreational vehicle and all
the other things if we don’t ever enjoy them together?” What
was her desire? Quality time with Bill. She wanted his
attention. She wanted him to focus on her, to give her time,
to do things with her.
By “quality time,” I mean giving someone your
undivided attention. I don’t mean sitting on the couch
watching television together. When you spend time that
way, ABC or NBC has your attention—not your spouse.
What I mean is sitting on the couch with the TV off, looking
at each other and talking, giving each other your undivided
attention. It means taking a walk, just the two of you, or
going out to eat and looking at each other and talking. Have
you ever noticed that in a restaurant, you can almost always
tell the difference between a dating couple and a married

couple? Dating couples look at each other and talk.
Married couples sit there and gaze around the restaurant.
You’d think they went there to eat!
When I sit on the couch with my wife and give her
twenty minutes of my undivided attention and she does the
same for me, we are giving each other twenty minutes of
life. We will never have those twenty minutes again; we are
giving our lives to each other. It is a powerful emotional
communicator of love.
One medicine cannot cure all diseases. In my advice
to Bill and Betty Jo, I made a serious mistake. I assumed
that words of affirmation would mean as much to Betty Jo
as they would to Bill. I had hoped that if each of them would
give adequate verbal affirmation, the emotional climate
would change, and both of them would begin to feel loved. It
worked for Bill. He began to feel more positive about Betty
Jo. He began to sense genuine appreciation for his hard
work, but it had not worked as well for Betty Jo, for words of
affirmation were not her primary love language. Her
language was quality time.

I got back on the phone and thanked Bill for his efforts in
the past two months. I told him that he had done a good job
of verbally affirming Betty Jo and that she had heard his
affirmations. “But, Dr. Chapman,” he said, “she is still not
very happy. I don’t think things are much better for her.”

“You are right,” I said, “and I think I know why. The
problem is that I suggested the wrong love language.” Bill
hadn’t the foggiest idea what I meant. I explained that what
makes one person feel loved emotionally is not always the
thing that makes another person feel loved emotionally.
He agreed that his language was words of affirmation.
He told me how much that had meant to him as a boy and
how good he felt when Betty Jo expressed appreciation for
the things he did. I explained that Betty Jo’s language was
not words of affirmation but quality time. I explained the
concept of giving someone your undivided attention, not
talking to her while you read the newspaper or watch
television but looking into her eyes, giving her your full
attention, doing something with her that she enjoys doing
and doing it wholeheartedly. “Like going to the symphony
with her,” he said. I could tell the lights were coming on in
Little Rock.
“Dr. Chapman, that is what she has always
complained about. I didn’t do things with her, I didn’t spend
any time with her. ‘We used to go places and do things
before we were married,’ she said, ‘but now, you’re too
busy.’ That’s her love language all right; no question about
it. But, Dr. Chapman, what am I gonna do? My job is so
demanding.”
“Tell me about it,” I said.
For the next ten minutes, he gave me the history of his
climb up the organizational ladder, of how hard he had
worked, and how proud he was of his accomplishments. He

told me of his dreams for the future and that he knew that
within the next five years, he would be where he wanted to
be.
“Do you want to be there alone, or do you want to be
there with Betty Jo and the children?” I asked.
“I want her to be with me, Dr. Chapman. I want her to
enjoy it with me. That’s why it always hurts so much when
she criticizes me for spending time on the job. I am doing it
for us. I wanted her to be a part of it, but she is always so
negative.”
“Are you beginning to see why she was so negative,
Bill?” I asked. “Her love language is quality time. You have
given her so little time that her love tank is empty. She
doesn’t feel secure in your love. Therefore she has lashed
out at what was taking your time in her mind—your job. She
doesn’t really hate your job. She hates the fact that she
feels so little love coming from you. There’s only one
answer, Bill, and it’s costly. You have to make time for Betty
Jo. You have to love her in the right love language.”
“I know you are right, Dr. Chapman. Where do I
begin?”
“Do you have your legal pad handy? The one on which
we made the list of the positive things about Betty Jo?”
“It’s right here.”
“Good. We’re going to make another list. What are
some things that you know Betty Jo would like you to do
with her? Things she has mentioned through the years.”
Here is Bill’s list:

Take our RV and spend a weekend in the
mountains (sometimes with the children and
sometimes just the two of us).
Meet her for lunch (at a nice restaurant or
sometimes even at McDonald’s).
Get a baby-sitter and take her out to dinner, just
the two of us.
When I come home at night, sit down and talk
with her about my day and listen as she tells me
about her day. (She doesn’t want me to watch
TV while we are trying to talk.)
Spend time talking with the children about their
school experiences.
Spend time playing games with the children.
Go on a picnic with her and the children on
Saturday and don’t complain about the ants and
the flies.
Take a vacation with the family at least once a
year.
Go walking with her and talk as we walk. (Don’t

walk ahead of her.)
“Those are the things she has talked about through the
years,” he said.
“You know what I am going to suggest, don’t you, Bill?”
“Do them,” he said.
“That’s right, one a week for the next two months.
Where will you find the time? You will make it. You are a
wise man,” I continued. “You would not be where you are if
you were not a good decision maker. You have the ability to
plan your life and to include Betty Jo in your plans.”
“I know,” he said, “I can do it.”
“And, Bill, this does not have to diminish your
vocational goals. It just means that when you get to the top,
Betty Jo and the children will be with you.”

A central aspect of quality time is togetherness. I do not
mean proximity…. Togetherness has to do with focused
attention.
“That’s what I want more than anything. Whether I am at
the top or not, I want her to be happy, and I want to enjoy life
with her and the children.”
The years have come and gone. Bill and Betty Jo have
gone to the top and back, but the important thing is that they

have done it together. The children have left the nest, and
Bill and Betty Jo agree that these are their best years ever.
Bill has become an avid symphony fan, and Betty Jo has
made an unending list in her legal pad of things she
appreciates about Bill. He never tires of hearing them. He
has now started his own company and is near the top
again. His job is no longer a threat to Betty Jo. She is
excited about it and encourages him. She knows that she is
number one in his life. Her love tank is full, and if it begins to
get empty, she knows that a simple request on her part will
get her Bill’s undivided attention.

T

OGETHERNESS

A central aspect of quality time is togetherness. I do
not mean proximity. Two people sitting in the same room
are in close proximity, but they are not necessarily together.
Togetherness has to do with focused attention. When a
father is sitting on the floor, rolling a ball to his two-year-old,
his attention is not focused on the ball but on his child. For
that brief moment, however long it lasts, they are together.
If, however, the father is talking on the phone while he rolls
the ball, his attention is diluted. Some husbands and wives
think they are spending time together when, in reality, they
are only living in close proximity. They are in the same
house at the same time, but they are not together. A
husband who is watching sports on television while he talks

to his wife is not giving her quality time, because she does
not have his full attention.
Quality time does not mean that we have to spend our
together moments gazing into each other’s eyes. It means
that we are doing something together and that we are
giving our full attention to the other person. The activity in
which we are both engaged is incidental. The important
thing emotionally is that we are spending focused time with
each other. The activity is a vehicle that creates the sense
of togetherness. The important thing about the father rolling
the ball to the two-year-old is not the activity itself, but the
emotions that are created between the father and his child.
Similarly, a husband and wife playing tennis together, if
it is genuine quality time, will focus not on the game but on
the fact that they are spending time together. What
happens on the emotional level is what matters. Our
spending time together in a common pursuit communicates
that we care about each other, that we enjoy being with
each other, that we like to do things together.

Q

UALITY

C

ONVERSATION

Like words of affirmation, the language of quality time
also has many dialects. One of the most common dialects
is that of quality conversation. By quality conversation, I
mean sympathetic dialogue where two individuals are
sharing their experiences, thoughts, feelings, and desires in

a friendly, uninterrupted context. Most individuals who
complain that their spouse does not talk do not mean
literally that he or she never says a word. They mean that he
or she seldom takes part in sympathetic dialogue. If your
spouse’s primary love language is quality time, such
dialogue is crucial to his or her emotional sense of being
loved.
Quality conversation is quite different from the first love
language. Words of affirmation focus on what we are
saying, whereas quality conversation focuses on what we
are hearing. If I am sharing my love for you by means of
quality time and we are going to spend that time in
conversation, it means I will focus on drawing you out,
listening sympathetically to what you have to say. I will ask
questions, not in a badgering manner but with a genuine
desire to understand your thoughts, feelings, and desires.

I met Patrick when he was forty-three and had been
married for seventeen years. I remember him because his
first words were so dramatic. He sat in the leather chair in
my office and after briefly introducing himself, he leaned
forward and said with great emotion, “Dr. Chapman, I have
been a fool, a real fool.”
“What has led you to that conclusion?” I asked.
“I’ve been married for seventeen years,” he said, “and
my wife has left me. Now I realize what a fool I’ve been.”

I repeated my original question, “In what way have you
been a fool?”
“My wife would come home from work and tell me
about the problems in her office. I would listen to her and
then tell her what I thought she should do. I always gave her
advice. I told her she had to confront the problem.
‘Problems don’t go away. You have to talk with the people
involved or your supervisor. You have to deal with
problems.’ The next day she would come home from work
and tell me about the same problems. I would ask her if she
did what I had suggested the day before. She would shake
her head and say no. So I’d repeat my advice. I told her that
was the way to deal with the situation. She would come
home the next day and tell me about the same problems.
Again I would ask her if she had done what I had
suggested. She would shake her head and say no.
“After three or four nights of that, I would get angry. I
would tell her not to expect any sympathy from me if she
wasn’t willing to take the advice I was giving her. She didn’t
have to live under that kind of stress and pressure. She
could solve the problem if she would simply do what I told
her. It hurt me to see her living under such stress because I
knew she didn’t have to. The next time she’d bring up the
problem, I would say, ‘I don’t want to hear about it. I’ve told
you what you need to do. If you’re not going to listen to my
advice, I don’t want to hear it.’

Many of us…are trained to analyze problems and create
solutions. We forget that marriage is a relationship, not a
project to be completed or a problem to solve.
“I would withdraw and go about my business. What a
fool I was,” he said, “what a fool! Now I realize that she
didn’t want advice when she told me about her struggles at
work. She wanted sympathy. She wanted me to listen, to
give her attention, to let her know that I could understand the
hurt, the stress, the pressure. She wanted to know that I
loved her and that I was with her. She didn’t want advice;
she just wanted to know that I understood. But I never tried
to understand. I was too busy giving advice. What a fool.
And now she is gone. Why can’t you see these things when
you are going through them?” he asked. “I was blind to what
was going on. Only now do I understand how I failed her.”

Patrick’s wife had been pleading for quality conversation.
Emotionally, she longed for him to focus attention on
her by listening to her pain and frustration. Patrick was not
focusing on listening but on speaking. He listened only long
enough to hear the problem and formulate a solution. He
didn’t listen long enough or well enough to hear her cry for
support and understanding.
Many of us are like Patrick. We are trained to analyze
problems and create solutions. We forget that marriage is

a relationship, not a project to be completed or a problem
to solve. A relationship calls for sympathetic listening with a
view to understanding the other person’s thoughts, feelings,
and desires. We must be willing to give advice but only
when it is requested and never in a condescending
manner. Most of us have little training in listening. We are
far more efficient in thinking and speaking. Learning to
listen may be as difficult as learning a foreign language, but
learn we must, if we want to communicate love. That is
especially true if your spouse’s primary love language is
quality time and his or her dialect is quality conversation.
Fortunately, numerous books and articles have been written
on developing the art of listening. I will not seek to repeat
what is written elsewhere but suggest the following
summary of practical tips.
1 . Maintain eye contact when your spouse is
talking. That keeps your mind from wandering and
communicates that he/she has your full attention.
2 . Don’t listen to your spouse and do something
else at the same time. Remember, quality time is
giving someone your undivided attention. If you are
watching, reading, or doing something else in which
you are keenly interested and cannot turn from
immediately, tell your spouse the truth. A positive
approach might be, “I know you are trying to talk to me
and I’m interested, but I want to give you my full

attention. I can’t do that right now, but if you will give
me ten minutes to finish this, I’ll sit down and listen to
you.” Most spouses will respect such a request.
3. Listen for feelings. Ask yourself, “What emotion is
my spouse experiencing?” When you think you have
the answer, confirm it. For example, “It sounds to me
like you are feeling disappointed because I forgot
__________.” That gives him the chance to clarify his
feelings. It also communicates that you are listening
intently to what he is saying.
4 . Observe body language. Clenched fists,
trembling hands, tears, furrowed brows, and eye
movement may give you clues as to what the other is
feeling. Sometimes body language speaks one
message while words speak another. Ask for
clarification to make sure you know what she is really
thinking and feeling.
5 . Refuse to interrupt. Recent research has
indicated that the average individual listens for only
seventeen seconds before interrupting and interjecting
his own ideas. If I give you my undivided attention while
you are talking, I will refrain from defending myself or
hurling accusations at you or dogmatically stating my
position. My goal is to discover your thoughts and
feelings. My objective is not to defend myself or to set

you straight. It is to understand you.

L

EARNING TO

T

ALK

Quality conversation requires not only sympathetic
listening but also self-revelation. When a wife says, “I wish
my husband would talk. I never know what he’s thinking or
feeling,” she is pleading for intimacy. She wants to feel
close to her husband, but how can she feel close to
someone whom she doesn’t know? In order for her to feel
loved, he must learn to reveal himself. If her primary love
language is quality time and her dialect is quality
conversation, her emotional love tank will never be filled
until he tells her his thoughts and feelings.

If you need to learn the language of quality conversation,
begin by noting the emotions you feel away from home.
Self-revelation does not come easy for some of us.
Many adults grew up in homes where the expression of
thoughts and feelings was not encouraged but condemned.
To request a toy was to receive a lecture on the sad state
of family finances. The child went away feeling guilty for
having the desire, and he quickly learned not to express his
desires. When he expressed anger, the parents responded
with harsh and condemning words. Thus, the child learned

that expressing angry feelings is not appropriate. If the child
was made to feel guilty for expressing disappointment at
not being able to go to the store with his father, he learned
to hold his disappointment inside. By the time we reach
adulthood, many of us have learned to deny our feelings.
We are no longer in touch with our emotional selves.
A wife says to her husband, “How did you feel about
what Don did?” And the husband responds, “I think he was
wrong. He should have—” but he is not telling her his
feelings. He is voicing his thoughts. Perhaps he has reason
to feel angry, hurt, or disappointed, but he has lived so long
in the world of thought that he does not acknowledge his
feelings. When he decides to learn the language of quality
conversation, it will be like learning a foreign language. The
place to begin is by getting in touch with his feelings,
becoming aware that he is an emotional creature in spite of
the fact that he has denied that part of his life.
If you need to learn the language of quality
conversation, begin by noting the emotions you feel away
from home. Carry a small notepad and keep it with you
daily. Three times each day, ask yourself, “What emotions
have I felt in the last three hours? What did I feel on the way
to work when the driver behind me was riding my bumper?
What did I feel when I stopped at the gas station and the
automatic pump did not shut off and the side of the car was
covered with gas? What did I feel when I got to the office
and found that my secretary had been assigned to a
special work project for the morning? What did I feel when

my supervisor told me that the project I was working on had
to be completed in three days when I thought I had another
two weeks?”
Write down your feelings in the notepad and a word or
two to help you remember the event corresponding to the
feeling. Your list may look like this:

EVENT

FEELINGS

• tailgater
• angry
• gas station
• very upset
• no secretary
• disappointed
• work project due in three days • frustrated and anxious
Do that exercise three times a day, and you will
develop an awareness of your emotional nature. Using your
notepad, communicate your emotions and the events briefly
with your spouse as many days as possible. In a few
weeks, you will become comfortable expressing your
emotions with him or her. And eventually you will feel
comfortable discussing your emotions toward your spouse,
the children, and events that occur within the home.
Remember, emotions themselves are neither good nor
bad. They are simply our psychological responses to the
events of life.

Based on our thoughts and emotions, we eventually make
decisions. When the tailgater was following you on the
highway and you felt angry, perhaps you had these
thoughts: I wish he would lay off; I wish he would pass me;

if I thought I wouldn’t get caught, I’d press the accelerator
and leave him in the twilight; I should slam on my brakes
and let his insurance company buy me a new car; maybe
I’ll pull off the road and let him pass.
Eventually, you made some decision or the other driver
backed off, turned, or passed you, and you arrived safely at
work. In each of life’s events, we have emotions, thoughts,
desires, and eventually actions. It is the expression of that
process that we call self-revelation. If you choose to learn
the love dialect of quality conversation, that is the learning
road you must follow.

P

ERSONALITY

T

YPES

Not all of us are out of touch with our emotions, but
when it comes to talking, all of us are affected by our
personality. I have observed two basic personality types.
The first I call the “Dead Sea.” In the little nation of Israel, the
Sea of Galilee flows south by way of the Jordan River into
the Dead Sea. The Dead Sea goes nowhere. It receives
but it does not give. This personality type receives many
experiences, emotions, and thoughts throughout the day.

They have a large reservoir where they store that
information, and they are perfectly happy not to talk. If you
say to a Dead Sea personality, “What’s wrong? Why aren’t
you talking tonight?” he will probably answer, “Nothing’s
wrong. What makes you think something’s wrong?” And
that response is perfectly honest. He is content not to talk.
He could drive from Chicago to Detroit and never say a
word and be perfectly happy.
On the other extreme is the “Babbling Brook.” For this
personality, whatever enters into the eye gate or the ear
gate comes out the mouth gate and there are seldom sixty
seconds between the two. Whatever they see, whatever
they hear, they tell. In fact if no one is at home to talk to, they
will call someone else. “Do you know what I saw? Do you
know what I heard?” If they can’t get someone on the
telephone, they may talk to themselves because they have
no reservoir. Many times a Dead Sea marries a Babbling
Brook. That happens because when they are dating, it is a
very attractive match.

One way to learn new patterns is to establish a daily
sharing time in which each of you will talk about three
things that happened to you that day and how you feel
about them.
If you are a Dead Sea and you date a Babbling Brook,

you will have a wonderful evening. You don’t have to think,
“How will I get the conversation started tonight? How will I
keep the conversation flowing?” In fact, you don’t have to
think at all. All you have to do is nod your head and say,
“Uh-huh,” and she will fill up the whole evening and you will
go home saying, “What a wonderful person.” On the other
hand, if you are a Babbling Brook and you date a Dead
Sea, you will have an equally wonderful evening because
Dead Seas are the world’s best listeners. You will babble
for three hours. He will listen intently to you, and you will go
home saying, “What a wonderful person.” You attract each
other. But five years after marriage, the Babbling Brook
wakes up one morning and says, “We’ve been married five
years, and I don’t know him.” The Dead Sea is saying, “I
know her too well. I wish she would stop the flow and give
me a break.” The good news is that Dead Seas can learn
to talk and Babbling Brooks can learn to listen. We are
influenced by our personality but not controlled by it.
One way to learn new patterns is to establish a daily
sharing time in which each of you will talk about three things
that happened to you that day and how you feel about them.
I call that the “Minimum Daily Requirement” for a healthy
marriage. If you will start with the daily minimum, in a few
weeks or months you may find quality conversation flowing
more freely between you.

Q

UALITY

A

CTIVITIES

In addition to the basic love language of quality time, or
giving your spouse your undivided attention, is another
dialect called quality activities. At a recent marriage
seminar, I asked couples to complete the following
sentence: “I feel most loved by my husband/ wife when
_______.” Here is the response of a twenty-nine-year-old
husband who has been married for eight years: “I feel most
loved by my wife when we do things together, things I like to
do and things she likes to do. We talk more. It sorta feels
like we are dating again.” That is a typical response of
individuals whose primary love language is quality time.
The emphasis is on being together, doing things together,
giving each other undivided attention.
Quality activities may include anything in which one or
both of you have an interest. The emphasis is not on what
you are doing but on why you are doing it. The purpose is to
experience something together, to walk away from it feeling
“He cares about me. He was willing to do something with
me that I enjoy, and he did it with a positive attitude.” That is
love, and for some people it is love’s loudest voice.

Tracie grew up with the symphony. Throughout her
childhood, the house was filled with classical music. At
least once a year, she accompanied her parents to the
symphony. Larry, on the other hand, grew up on country and
western music. He never actually attended a concert, but

the radio was always on, tuned to the country station. The
symphony he called elevator music. Had he not married
Tracie, he could have lived his life without ever attending
the symphony. Before they were married, while he was still
in the obsessed state of being in love, he went to the
symphony. But even in his euphoric emotional state, his
attitude was, “You call this stuff music?” After marriage, that
was one experience he never expected to repeat. When,
however, he discovered several years later that quality time
was Tracie’s primary love language and that she especially
liked the dialect of quality activities and that attending the
symphony was one of those activities, he chose to go with
an enthusiastic spirit. His purpose was clear. It was not to
attend the symphony but to love Tracie and to speak her
language loudly. In time, he did come to appreciate the
symphony and even occasionally to enjoy a movement or
two. He may never become a symphony lover, but he has
become proficient at loving Tracie.

Quality activities may include such activities as putting in
a garden, visiting flea markets, shopping for antiques,
listening to music, picnicking together, taking long walks, or
washing the car together on a hot summer day. The
activities are limited only by your interest and willingness to
try new experiences. The essential ingredients in a quality
activity are: (1) at least one of you wants to do it, (2) the

other is willing to do it, (3) both of you know why you are
doing it—to express love by being together.
One of the by-products of quality activities is that they
provide a memory bank from which to draw in the years
ahead. Fortunate is the couple who remembers an early
morning stroll along the coast, the spring they planted the
flower garden, the time they got poison ivy chasing the
rabbit through the woods, the night they attended their first
major league baseball game together, the one and only
time they went skiing together and he broke his leg, the
amusement parks, the concerts, the cathedrals, and oh,
yes, the awe of standing beneath the waterfall after the twomile hike. They can almost feel the mist as they remember.
Those are memories of love, especially for the person
whose primary love language is quality time.
And where do we find time for such activities,
especially if both of us have vocations outside the home?
We make time just as we make time for lunch and dinner.
Why? Because it is just as essential to our marriage as
meals are to our health. Is it difficult? Does it take careful
planning? Yes. Does it mean we have to give up some
individual activities? Perhaps. Does it mean we do some
things we don’t particularly enjoy? Certainly. Is it worth it?
Without a doubt. What’s in it for me? The pleasure of living
with a spouse who feels loved and knowing that I have
learned to speak his or her love language fluently.
A personal word of thanks to Bill and Betty Jo in Little
Rock, who taught me the value of love language number

one, Words of Affirmation, and love language number two,
Quality Time. Now, it’s on to Chicago and love language
number three.

If your spouse’s love language is Quality Time:
1. Take a walk together through the old
neighborhood where one of you grew up. Ask
questions about your spouse’s childhood. Ask, “What
are the fun memories of your childhood?” Then, “What
was most painful about your childhood?”
2. Go to the city park and rent bicycles. Ride until
you are tired, then sit and watch the ducks. When you
get tired of the quacks, roll on to the rose garden.
Learn each other’s favorite color of rose and why. (If
the bikes are too much, take turns pulling each other in
a little red wagon.)
3. In the spring or summer make a luncheon
appointment with your spouse. Meet him and drive to
the local cemetery. Spread your tablecloth and eat
your sandwiches and thank God that you are still alive.
Share with each other one thing you would like to do
before you die.
4. Ask your spouse for a list of five activities that he

would enjoy doing with you. Make plans to do one of
them each month for the next five months. If money is a
problem, space the freebies between the “we can’t
afford this” events.
5. Ask your spouse where she most enjoys sitting
when talking with you. The next week, call her one
afternoon and say, “I want to make a date with you one
evening this week to sit on the yellow sofa and talk.
Which night and what time would be best for you?”
(Don’t say “yellow sofa” if her favorite place is in the
Jacuzzi!)
6. Think of an activity your spouse enjoys, but which
brings little pleasure to you: football, symphony, jazz
concert, or TV sleeping. Tell your spouse that you are
trying to broaden your horizons and would like to join
her in this activity sometime this month. Set a date and
give it your best effort. Ask questions about the activity
at break times.
7. Plan a weekend getaway just for the two of you
sometime within the next six months. Be sure it is a
weekend when you won’t have to call the office or turn
on the TV for a report every thirty minutes. Focus on
relaxing together doing what one or both of you enjoy.
8. Make time every day to share with each other

some of the events of the day. When you spend more
time watching the news than you do listening to each
other, you end up more concerned about Bosnia than
about your spouse.
9. Have a “Let’s review our history” evening once
every three months. Set aside an hour to focus on your
history. Select five questions each of you will answer,
such as:
(1) Who was your best and worst teacher in school and
why?
(2) When did you feel your parents were proud of you?
(3) What is the worst mistake your mother ever made?
(4) What is the worst mistake your father ever made?
(5) What do you remember about the religious aspect
of your childhood?
Each evening, agree on your five questions
before you begin your sharing. At the end of the five
questions, stop and decide upon the five questions
you will ask next time.
10. Camp out by the fireplace (or an orange lamp).
Spread your blankets and pillows on the floor. Get your
Pepsi and popcorn. Pretend the TV is broken and talk
like you used to when you were dating. Talk till the sun

comes up or something else happens. If the floor gets
too hard, go back upstairs and go to bed. You won’t
forget this evening!

chapter six

Love Language #3

R

ECEIVING

G

IFTS

I was in Chicago when I studied anthropology. By means
of detailed ethnographies, I visited fascinating peoples all
over the world. I went to Central America and studied the
advanced cultures of the Mayans and the Aztecs. I crossed
the Pacific and studied the tribal peoples of Melanesia and
Polynesia. I studied the Eskimos of the northern tundra and
the aboriginal Ainus of Japan. I examined the cultural
patterns surrounding love and marriage and found that in
every culture I studied, gift giving was a part of the lovemarriage process.
Anthropologists are enamored by cultural patterns that
tend to pervade cultures, and so was I. Could it be that gift
giving is a fundamental expression of love that transcends
cultural barriers? Is the attitude of love always
accompanied by the concept of giving? Those are
academic and somewhat philosophical questions, but if the
answer is yes, it has profound practical implications for
North American couples.
I took an anthropology field trip to the island of

Dominica. Our purpose was to study the culture of the
Carib Indians, and on the trip I met Fred. Fred was not a
Carib but a young black man of twenty-eight years. Fred
had lost a hand in a fishing-by-dynamite accident. Since the
accident, he could not continue his fishing career. He had
plenty of available time, and I welcomed his
companionship. We spent hours together talking about his
culture.
Upon my first visit to Fred’s house, he said to me, “Mr.
Gary, would you like to have some juice?” to which I
responded enthusiastically. He turned to his younger
brother and said, “Go get Mr. Gary some juice.” His brother
turned, walked down the dirt path, climbed a coconut tree,
and returned with a green coconut. “Open it,” Fred
commanded. With three swift movements of the machete,
his brother uncorked the coconut, leaving a triangular hole
at the top. Fred handed me the coconut and said, “Juice for
you.” It was green, but I drank it—all of it—because I knew it
was a gift of love. I was his friend, and to friends you give
juice.
At the end of our weeks together as I prepared to
leave that small island, Fred gave me a final token of his
love. It was a crooked stick fourteen inches in length which
he had taken from the ocean. It was silky smooth from
pounding upon the rocks. Fred said that the stick had lived
on the shores of Dominica for a long time, and he wanted
me to have it as a reminder of the beautiful island. Even
today when I look at that stick, I can almost hear the sound

of the Caribbean waves, but it is not as much a reminder of
Dominica as it is a reminder of love.

A gift is something you can hold in your hand and say,
“Look, he was thinking of me,” or, “She remembered me.”
You must be thinking of someone to give him a gift. The gift
itself is a symbol of that thought. It doesn’t matter whether it
costs money. What is important is that you thought of him.
And it is not the thought implanted only in the mind that
counts, but the thought expressed in actually securing the
gift and giving it as the expression of love.
Mothers remember the days their children bring a
flower from the yard as a gift. They feel loved, even if it was
a flower they didn’t want picked. From early years, children
are inclined to give gifts to their parents, which may be
another indication that gift giving is fundamental to love.
Gifts are visual symbols of love. Most wedding
ceremonies include the giving and receiving of rings. The
person performing the ceremony says, “These rings are
outward and visible signs of an inward and spiritual bond
that unites your two hearts in love that has no end.” That is
not meaningless rhetoric. It is verbalizing a significant truth
—symbols have emotional value. Perhaps that is even
more graphically displayed near the end of a disintegrating
marriage when the husband or wife stops wearing the
wedding ring. It is a visual sign that the marriage is in

serious trouble. One husband said, “When she threw her
wedding rings at me and angrily walked out of the house
slamming the door behind her, I knew our marriage was in
serious trouble. I didn’t pick up her rings for two days. When
I finally did, I cried uncontrollably.” The rings were a symbol
of what should have been, but lying in his hand and not on
her finger, they were visual reminders that the marriage
was falling apart. The lonely rings stirred deep emotions
within the husband.
Visual symbols of love are more important to some
people than to others. That’s why individuals have different
attitudes toward wedding rings. Some never take the ring
off after the wedding. Others don’t even wear a wedding
band. That is another sign that people have different
primary love languages. If receiving gifts is my primary love
language, I will place great value on the ring you have given
me and I will wear it with great pride. I will also be greatly
moved emotionally by other gifts that you give through the
years. I will see them as expressions of love. Without gifts
as visual symbols, I may question your love.
Gifts come in all sizes, colors, and shapes. Some are
expensive, and others are free. To the individual whose
primary love language is receiving gifts, the cost of the gift
will matter little, unless it is greatly out of line with what you
can afford. If a millionaire gives only one-dollar gifts
regularly, the spouse may question whether that is an
expression of love, but when family finances are limited, a
one-dollar gift may speak a million dollars worth of love.

If your spouse’s primary love language is receiving gifts,
you can become a proficient gift giver. In fact, it is one of
the easiest love languages to learn.
Gifts may be purchased, found, or made. The husband
who stops along the roadside and picks his wife a
wildflower has found himself an expression of love, unless,
of course, his wife is allergic to wildflowers. For the man
who can afford it, you can purchase a beautiful card for less
than five dollars. For the man who cannot, you can make
one for free. Get the paper out of the trash can where you
work, fold it in the middle, take scissors and cut out a heart,
write “I love you,” and sign your name. Gifts need not be
expensive.
But what of the person who says, “I’m not a gift giver. I
didn’t receive many gifts growing up. I never learned how to
select gifts. It doesn’t come naturally for me.”
Congratulations, you have just made the first discovery in
becoming a great lover. You and your spouse speak
different love languages. Now that you have made that
discovery, get on with the business of learning your second
language. If your spouse’s primary love language is
receiving gifts, you can become a proficient gift giver. In
fact, it is one of the easiest love languages to learn.
Where do you begin? Make a list of all the gifts your

spouse has expressed excitement about receiving through
the years. They may be gifts you have given or gifts given
by other family members or friends. The list will give you an
idea of the kind of gifts your spouse would enjoy receiving.
If you have little or no knowledge about selecting the kinds
of gifts on your list, recruit the help of family members who
know your spouse. In the meantime, select gifts that you
feel comfortable purchasing, making, or finding, and give
them to your spouse. Don’t wait for a special occasion. If
receiving gifts is his/her primary love language, almost
anything you give will be received as an expression of love.
(If she has been critical of your gifts in the past and almost
nothing you have given has been acceptable, then
receiving gifts is almost certainly not her primary love
language.)

G

IFTS AND

M

ONEY

If you are to become an effective gift giver, you may
have to change your attitude about money. Each of us has
an individualized perception of the purposes of money, and
we have various emotions associated with spending it.
Some of us have a spending orientation. We feel good
about ourselves when we are spending money. Others
have a saving and investing perspective. We feel good
about ourselves when we are saving money and investing it
wisely.

If you are a spender, you will have little difficulty
purchasing gifts for your spouse; but if you are a saver, you
will experience emotional resistance to the idea of
spending money as an expression of love. You don’t
purchase things for yourself. Why should you purchase
things for your spouse? But that attitude fails to recognize
that you are purchasing things for yourself. By saving and
investing money you are purchasing self-worth and
emotional security. You are caring for your own emotional
needs in the way you handle money. What you are not
doing is meeting the emotional needs of your spouse. If you
discover that your spouse’s primary love language is
receiving gifts, then perhaps you will understand that
purchasing gifts for him or her is the best investment you
can make. You are investing in your relationship and filling
your spouse’s emotional love tank, and with a full love tank,
he or she will likely reciprocate emotional love to you in a
language you will understand. When both persons’
emotional needs are met, your marriage will take on a
whole new dimension. Don’t worry about your savings. You
will always be a saver, but to invest in loving your spouse is
to invest in blue-chip stocks.

T G
HE

IFT OF

S

ELF

There is an intangible gift that sometimes speaks
more loudly than a gift that can be held in one’s hand. I call

it the gift of self or the gift of presence. Being there when
your spouse needs you speaks loudly to the one whose
primary love language is receiving gifts. Jan once said to
me, “My husband, Don, loves softball more than he loves
me.”
“Why do you say that?” I inquired.
“On the day our baby was born, he played softball. I
was lying in the hospital all afternoon while he played
softball,” she said.
“Was he there when the baby was born?”
“Oh, yes. He stayed long enough for the baby to be
born, but ten minutes afterward, he left to play softball. I was
devastated. It was such an important moment in our lives. I
wanted us to share it together. I wanted him to be there with
me. Don deserted me to play.”
That husband may have sent her a dozen roses, but
they would not have spoken as loudly as his presence in the
hospital room beside her. I could tell that Jan was deeply
hurt by that experience. The “baby” was now fifteen years
old, and she was talking about the event with all the
emotion as though it had happened yesterday. I probed
further. “Have you based your conclusion that Don loves
softball more than he loves you on this one experience?”
“Oh, no,” she said. “On the day of my mother’s funeral,
he also played softball.”
“Did he go to the funeral?”
“Oh, yes. He went to the funeral, but as soon as it was
over, he left to play softball. I couldn’t believe it. My brothers

and sisters came to the house with me, but my husband
was playing softball.”
Later, I asked Don about those two events. He knew
exactly what I was talking about. “I knew she would bring
that up,” he said. “I was there through all the labor and when
the baby was born. I took pictures; I was so happy. I couldn’t
wait to tell the guys on the team, but my bubble was burst
when I got back to the hospital that evening. She was
furious with me. I couldn’t believe what she was saying. I
thought she would be proud of me for telling the team.

Physical presence in the time of crisis is the most
powerful gift you can give if your spouse’s primary love
language is receiving gifts.
“And when her mother died? She probably did not tell
you that I took off work a week before she died and spent
the whole week at the hospital and at her mother’s house
doing repairs and helping out. After she died and the
funeral was over, I felt I had done all I could do. I needed a
breather. I like to play softball, and I knew that would help
me relax and relieve some of the stress I’d been under. I
thought she would want me to take a break.
“I had done what I thought was important to her, but it
wasn’t enough. She has never let me forget those two days.
She says that I love softball more than I love her. That’s

ridiculous.”
He was a sincere husband who failed to understand
the tremendous power of presence. His being there for his
wife was more important than anything else in her mind.
Physical presence in the time of crisis is the most powerful
gift you can give if your spouse’s primary love language is
receiving gifts. Your body becomes the symbol of your love.
Remove the symbol, and the sense of love evaporates. In
counseling, Don and Jan worked through the hurts and
misunderstandings of the past. Eventually, Jan was able to
forgive him, and Don came to understand why his presence
was so important to her.

If the physical presence of your spouse is important to you,
I urge you to verbalize that to your spouse. Don’t expect him
to read your mind. If, on the other hand, your spouse says to
you, “I really want you to be there with me tonight, tomorrow,
this afternoon,” take his request seriously. From your
perspective, it may not be important; but if you are not
responsive to that request, you may be communicating a
message you do not intend. A husband once said, “When
my mother died, my wife’s supervisor said that she could
be off two hours for the funeral but she needed to be back
in the office for the afternoon. My wife told him that she felt
her husband needed her support that day and she would
have to be away the entire day.

“The supervisor replied, ‘If you are gone all day, you
may well lose your job.’
“My wife said, ‘My husband is more important than my
job.’ She spent the day with me. Somehow that day, I felt
more loved by her than ever before. I have never forgotten
what she did. Incidentally,” he said, “she didn’t lose her job.
Her supervisor soon left, and she was asked to take his
job.” That wife had spoken the love language of her
husband, and he never forgot it.

Almost everything ever written on the subject of love
indicates that at the heart of love is the spirit of giving. All
five love languages challenge us to give to our spouse, but
for some, receiving gifts, visible symbols of love, speaks
the loudest. I heard the most graphic illustration of that truth
in Chicago, where I met Jim and Janice.
They attended my marriage seminar and agreed to
take me to O’Hare Airport after the seminar on Saturday
afternoon. We had two or three hours before my flight, and
they asked if I would like to stop at a restaurant. I was
famished, so I readily agreed. That afternoon, however, I
got much more than a free meal.
Jim and Janice both grew up on farms in central Illinois
not more than a hundred miles from each other. They
moved to Chicago shortly after their wedding. I was hearing
their story fifteen years and three children later. Janice

began talking almost immediately after we sat down. She
said, “Dr. Chapman, the reason we wanted to take you to
the airport is so that we could tell you about our miracle.”
Something about the word miracle always causes me to
brace myself, especially if I don’t know the person who is
using it. What bizarre story am I going to hear? I
wondered, but I kept my thoughts to myself and gave Janice
my undivided attention. I was about to be shocked.
She said, “Dr. Chapman, God used you to perform a
miracle in our marriage.” I felt guilty already. A moment ago,
I was questioning her use of the term miracle, and now in
her mind I was the vehicle of a miracle. Now I was listening
even more intently. Janice continued, “Three years ago, we
attended your marriage seminar here in Chicago for the
first time. I was desperate,” she said. “I was thinking
seriously of leaving Jim and had told him so. Our marriage
had been empty for a long time. I had given up. For years, I
had complained to Jim that I needed his love, but he never
responded. I loved the children, and I knew they loved me,
but I felt nothing coming from Jim. In fact, by that time, I
hated him. He was a methodical person. He did everything
by routine. He was as predictable as a clock, and no one
could break into his routine.
“For years,” she continued, “I tried to be a good wife. I
cooked, I washed, I ironed, I cooked, I washed, I ironed. I
did all the things I thought a good wife should do. I had sex
with him because I knew that was important to him, but I felt
no love coming from him. I felt like he stopped dating me

after we got married and simply took me for granted. I felt
used and unappreciated.
“When I talked to Jim about my feelings, he’d laugh at
me and say we had as good a marriage as anybody else in
the community. He didn’t understand why I was so unhappy.
He would remind me that the bills were paid, that we had a
nice house and a new car, that I was free to work or not
work outside the home, and that I should be happy instead
of complaining all the time. He didn’t even try to understand
my feelings. I felt totally rejected.
“Well, anyway,” she said as she moved her tea and
leaned forward, “we came to your seminar three years ago.
We had never been to a marriage seminar before. I did not
know what to expect, and frankly I didn’t expect much. I
didn’t think anybody could change Jim. During and after the
seminar, Jim didn’t say too much. He seemed to like it. He
said that you were funny, but he didn’t talk with me about
any of the ideas in the seminar. I didn’t expect him to, and I
didn’t ask him to. As I said, I had already given up by then.
“As you know,” she said, “the seminar ended on
Saturday afternoon. Saturday night and Sunday were pretty
much as usual, but Monday afternoon, he came home from
work and gave me a rose. ‘Where did you get that?’ I
asked. ‘I bought it from a street vendor,’ he said. ‘I thought
you deserved a rose.’ I started crying. ‘Oh, Jim, that is so
sweet of you.’
“In my mind,” she said, “I knew he bought the rose from
a Moonie. I had seen the young man selling roses that

afternoon, but it didn’t matter. The fact was, he had brought
me a rose. On Tuesday he called me from the office at
about one-thirty and asked me what I thought about his
buying a pizza and bringing it home for dinner. He said he
thought I might enjoy a break from cooking dinner. I told him
I thought the idea was wonderful, and so he brought home a
pizza and we had a fun time together. The children loved
the pizza and thanked their father for bringing it. I actually
gave him a hug and told him how much I enjoyed it.
“When he came home on Wednesday, he brought
each of the children a box of Cracker Jacks, and he had a
small potted plant for me. He said he knew the rose would
die, and he thought I might like something that would be
around for a while. I was beginning to think I was
hallucinating! I couldn’t believe what Jim was doing or why
he was doing it. Thursday night after dinner, he handed me
a card with a message about his not always being able to
express his love to me but hoping that the card would
communicate how much he cared. Again I cried, looked up
at him, and could not resist hugging and kissing him. ‘Why
don’t we get a baby-sitter on Saturday night and the two of
us go out for dinner?’ he suggested. ‘That would be
wonderful,’ I said. On Friday afternoon, he stopped by the
cookie shop and bought each of us one of our favorite
cookies. Again, he kept it as a surprise, telling us only that
he had a treat for dessert.
“By Saturday night,” she said, “I was in orbit. I had no
idea what had come over Jim, or if it would last, but I was

enjoying every minute of it. After our dinner at the
restaurant, I said to him, ‘Jim, you have to tell me what’s
happening. I don’t understand.’”
She looked at me intently and said, “Dr. Chapman, you
have to understand. This man had never given me a flower
since the day we got married. He never gave me a card for
any occasion. He always said, ‘It’s a waste of money; you
look at the card and throw it away.’ We’d been out to dinner
one time in five years. He never bought the children
anything and expected me to buy only the essentials. He
had never brought a pizza home for dinner. He expected
me to have dinner ready every night. I mean, this was a
radical change in his behavior.”
I turned to Jim and asked, “What did you say to her in
the restaurant when she asked you what was going on?”
“I told her that I had listened to your lecture on love
languages at the seminar and that I realized that her love
language was gifts. I also realized that I had not given her a
gift in years, maybe not since we had been married. I
remembered that when we were dating I used to bring her
flowers and other small gifts, but after marriage I figured we
couldn’t afford that. I told her that I had decided that I was
going to try to get her a gift every day for one week and see
if it made any difference in her. I had to admit that I had
seen a pretty big difference in her attitude during the week.
“I told her that I realized that what you said was really
true and that learning the right love language was the key to
helping another person feel loved. I said I was sorry that I

had been so dense for all those years and had failed to
meet her need for love. I told her that I really loved her and
that I appreciated all the things she did for me and the
children. I told her that with God’s help, I was going to be a
gift giver for the rest of my life.
“She said, ‘But, Jim, you can’t go on buying me gifts
every day for the rest of your life. You can’t afford that.’
‘Well, maybe not every day,’ I said, ‘but at least once a
week. That would be fifty-two more gifts per year than what
you have received in the past five years.’ I continued, ‘And
who said I was going to buy all of them? I might even make
some of them, or I’ll take Dr. Chapman’s idea and pick a
free flower from the front yard in the spring.’”
Janice interrupted, “Dr. Chapman, I don’t think he has
missed a single week in three years. He is like a new man.
You wouldn’t believe how happy we have been. Our
children call us lovebirds now. My tank is full and
overflowing.”
I turned to Jim and asked, “But what about you, Jim?
Do you feel loved by Janice?”
“Oh, I’ve always felt loved by her, Dr. Chapman. She is
the best housekeeper in the world. She is an excellent
cook. She keeps my clothes washed and ironed. She is
wonderful about doing things for the children. I know she
loves me.” He smiled and said, “Now, you know what my
love language is, don’t you?”
I did, and I also knew why Janice had used the word

miracle.

Gifts need not be expensive, nor must they be given
weekly.
But for some individuals, their worth has nothing to do
with monetary value and everything to do with love.
In chapter 7, we will clarify Jim’s love language.

If your spouse’s love language is Receiving Gifts:
1. Try a parade of gifts: Leave a box of candy for
your spouse in the morning (yogurt candy if health is an
issue); have flowers delivered in the afternoon (unless
your spouse is allergic to flowers); give him a shirt in
the evening. When your spouse asks, “What is going
on?” you respond: “Just trying to fill your love tank!”
2. Let nature be your guide: The next time you take a
walk through the neighborhood, keep your eyes open
for a gift for your spouse. It may be a stone, a stick, or
a flower (be sure to ask your neighbor, if the flower is
not in your own yard). You may even attach special
meaning to your natural gift. For example, a smooth
stone may symbolize your marriage with many of the
rough places now polished. A rose may remind you of

the beauty you see in your spouse.
3. Discover the value of “handmade originals.” Make
a gift for your spouse. This may require you to enroll in
an art or crafts class: ceramics, silversmithing,
painting, wood carving, etc. Your main purpose for
enrolling is to make your spouse a gift. A handmade
gift often becomes a family heirloom.
4. Give your spouse a gift every day for one week. It
need not be a special week, just any week. I promise
you it will become “The Week That Was!” If you are
really energetic, you can make it “The Month That
Was!” No—your spouse will not expect you to keep
this up for a lifetime.
5. Keep a “Gift Idea Notebook.” Every time you hear
your spouse say: “I really like that,” or “Oh, I would really
like to have one of those!” write it down in your
notebook. Listen carefully and you will get quite a list.
This will serve as a guide when you get ready to select
a gift. To prime the pump, you may look through a
shopping catalog together.

6. “Help! I’m confused!” If you really don’t have a clue
as to how to select a gift for your spouse, ask a friend
or family member who knows your wife or husband well
to help you. Most people enjoy making a friend happy
by getting them a gift, especially if it is with your
money.
7. Offer the gift of presence. Say to your spouse: “I
want to offer the gift of my presence at any event or on
any occasion you would like this month. You tell me
when, and I will make every effort to be there.” Get
ready! Be positive! Who knows, you may enjoy the
symphony or the hockey game.
8. Give your spouse a book and agree to read it
yourself. Then offer to discuss together a chapter each
week. Don’t choose a book that you want him or her to
read. Choose a book on a topic in which you know
your spouse has an interest: sex, football, needlework,
money management, child rearing, religion, or
backpacking.
9. Give a lasting tribute. Give a substantial gift to
your spouse’s church or favorite charity in honor of her
birthday, your anniversary, or another occasion. Ask

the charity to send a card informing your spouse of
what you have done. The church or charity will be
excited and so will your spouse.
10. Give a living gift. Purchase and plant a tree or
flowering shrub in honor of your spouse. You may plant
it in your own yard, where you can water and nurture it,
or in a public park or forest where others can also
enjoy it. You will get credit for this one year after year. If
it is an apple tree, you may live long enough to get an
apple. One warning: Don’t plant a crab apple tree!

chapter seven

Love Language #4

A

CTS OF

S

ERVICE

Before we leave Jim and Janice, let’s reexamine Jim’s
answer to my question, “Do you feel loved by Janice?”
“Oh, I’ve always felt loved by her, Dr. Chapman. She is
the best housekeeper in the world. She is an excellent
cook. She keeps my clothes washed and ironed. She is
wonderful about doing things with the children. I know she
loves me.”
Jim’s primary love language was what I call “acts of
service.” By acts of service, I mean doing things you know
your spouse would like you to do. You seek to please her
by serving her, to express your love for her by doing things
for her.
Such actions as cooking a meal, setting a table,
washing dishes, vacuuming, cleaning a commode, getting
hairs out of the sink, removing the white spots from the
mirror, getting bugs off the windshield, taking out the
garbage, changing the baby’s diaper, painting a bedroom,
dusting the bookcase, keeping the car in operating
condition, washing or vacuuming the car, cleaning the

garage, mowing the grass, trimming the shrubs, raking the
leaves, dusting the blinds, walking the dog, changing the
cat’s litter box, and changing water in the goldfish bowl are
all acts of service. They require thought, planning, time,
effort, and energy. If done with a positive spirit, they are
indeed expressions of love.
Jesus Christ gave a simple but profound illustration of
expressing love by an act of service when He washed the
feet of His disciples. In a culture where people wore
sandals and walked on dirt streets, it was customary for the
servant of the household to wash the feet of guests as they
arrived. Jesus, who had instructed His disciples to love one
another, gave them an example of how to express that love
when He took a basin and a towel and proceeded to wash
their feet.1 After that simple expression of love, He
encouraged His disciples to follow His example.
Earlier in His life, Jesus had indicated that in His
kingdom those who would be great would be servants. In
most societies, those who are great lord it over those who
are small, but Jesus Christ said that those who are great
would serve others. The apostle Paul summarized that
philosophy when he said, “Serve one another in love.”2

I discovered the impact of “acts of service” in the little
village of China Grove, North Carolina. China Grove sits in
central North Carolina, originally nestled in chinaberry trees,

not far from Andy Griffith’s legendary Mayberry, and an hour
and a half from Mount Pilot. At the time of this story, China
Grove was a textile town with a population of 1,500. I had
been away for more than ten years, studying anthropology,
psychology, and theology. I was making my semiannual
visit to keep in touch with my roots.
Almost everyone I knew except Dr. Shin and Dr. Smith
worked in the mill. Dr. Shin was the medical doctor, and Dr.
Smith was the dentist. And of course, there was Preacher
Blackburn, who was pastor of the church. For most couples
in China Grove, life centered on work and church. The
conversation at the mill focused on the superintendent’s
latest decision and how it affected their job in particular.
The services at church focused mainly on the anticipated
joys of heaven. In that pristine American setting, I
discovered love language number four.
I was standing under a chinaberry tree after church on
Sunday when Mark and Mary approached me. I didn’t
recognize either of them. I assumed they had grown up
while I was away. Introducing himself, Mark said, “I
understand you have been studying counseling.”
I smiled and said, “Well, a little bit.”
“I have a question,” he said. “Can a couple make it in
marriage if they disagree on everything?”
It was one of those theoretical questions that I knew
had a personal root. I brushed aside the theoretical nature
of his question and asked him a personal question. “How
long have you been married?”

“Two years,” he responded. “And we don’t agree on
anything.”
“Give me some examples,” I continued.
“Well, for one thing, Mary doesn’t like me to go hunting.
I work all week in the mill, and I like to go hunting on
Saturdays—not every Saturday but when hunting season is
in.”
Mary had been silent until this point when she
interjected. “When hunting season is out, he goes fishing,
and besides that, he doesn’t hunt just on Saturdays. He
takes off from work to go hunting.”
“Once or twice a year I take off two or three days from
work to go hunting in the mountains with some buddies. I
don’t think there is anything wrong with that.”
“What else do you disagree on?” I asked.
“Well, she wants me to go to church all the time. I don’t
mind going on Sunday morning, but Sunday night I like to
rest. It’s all right if she wants to go, but I don’t think I ought to
have to go.”
Again, Mary spoke up. “You don’t really want me to go
either,” she said. “You fuss every time I walk out the door.”
I knew that things weren’t supposed to be getting this
hot under a shady tree in front of a church. As a young,
aspiring counselor, I feared that I was getting in over my
head, but having been trained to ask questions and listen, I
continued. “What other things do you disagree on?”
This time Mary answered. “He wants me to stay home
all day and work in the house,” she said. “He gets mad if I

go see my mother or go shopping or something.”
“I don’t mind her going to see her mother,” he said, “but
when I come home, I like to see the house cleaned up.
Some weeks, she doesn’t make the bed up for three or four
days, and half the time, she hasn’t even started supper. I
work hard, and I like to eat when I get home. Besides that,
the house is a wreck,” he continued. “The baby’s things are
all over the floor, the baby is dirty, and I don’t like filth. She
seems to be happy to live in a pigpen. We don’t have very
much, and we live in a small mill house, but at least it could
be clean.”
“What’s wrong with his helping me around the house?”
Mary asked. “He acts like a husband shouldn’t do anything
around the house. All he wants to do is work and hunt. He
expects me to do everything. He even expects me to wash
the car.”
Thinking that I had better start looking for solutions
rather than prying for more disagreements, I looked at Mark
and asked, “Mark, when you were dating, before you got
married, did you go hunting every Saturday?”
“Most Saturdays,” he said, “but I always got home in
time to go see her on Saturday night. Most of the time, I’d
get home in time to wash my truck before I went to see her.
I didn’t like to go see her with a dirty truck.”
“Mary, how old were you when you got married?” I
asked.
“I was eighteen,” she said. “We got married right after I
finished high school. Mark graduated a year before me,

and he was working.”
“During your senior year in high school, how often did
Mark come to see you?” I inquired.
“He came almost every night,” she said. “In fact, he
came in the afternoon and would often stay and have
supper with my family. He would help me do my chores
around the house and then we’d sit and talk until supper
time.”
“Mark, what did the two of you do after supper?” I
asked.
Mark looked up with a sheepish smile and said, “Well,
the regular dating stuff, you know.”
“But if I had a school project,” Mary said, “he’d help me
with it. Sometimes we worked hours on school projects. I
was in charge of the Christmas float for the senior class. He
helped me for three weeks every afternoon. He was great.”
I switched gears and focused on the third area of their
disagreement. “Mark, when you were dating, did you go to
church with Mary on Sunday nights?”
“Yes, I did,” he said. “If I didn’t go to church with her, I
couldn’t see her that night. Her father was strict that way.”
“He never complained about it,” Mary said. “In fact, he
seemed to enjoy it. He even helped us with the Christmas
program. After we finished the Christmas float project, we
started working on the set for the Christmas program at the
church. We spent about two weeks working together on
that. He is really talented when it comes to painting and
building sets.”

I thought I was beginning to see some light, but I wasn’t
sure Mark and Mary were seeing it. I turned to Mary and
asked, “When you were dating Mark, what convinced you
that he really loved you? What made him different from
other guys you had dated?”
“It was the way he helped me with everything,” she
said. “He was so eager to help me. None of the other guys
ever expressed any interest in those things, but it seemed
natural for Mark. He even helped me wash dishes when he
had supper at our house. He was the most wonderful
person I had ever met, but after we got married that
changed. He didn’t help me at all.”
Turning to Mark I asked, “Why do you think you did all
those things for and with her before you were married?”
“It just seemed natural for me,” he said. “It’s what I
would want someone to do for me if she cared about me.”
“And why do you think you stopped helping her after
you got married?” I asked.
“Well, I guess I expected it to be like my family. Dad
worked, and Mom took care of things at the house. I never
saw my dad vacuum the floor or wash the dishes or do
anything around the house. Since Mom didn’t work outside
the house, she kept everything spotless, did all the cooking,
washing, and ironing. And I guess I just thought that was the
way it was supposed to be.”
Hoping that Mark was seeing what I was seeing, I
asked, “Mark, a moment ago what did you hear Mary say
when I asked her what really made her feel loved by you

when you were dating?”
He responded, “Helping her with things and doing
things with her.”

Requests give direction to love, but demands stop the
flow of love.
“So, can you understand,” I continued, “how she could
feel unloved when you stopped helping her with things?” His
head was bobbing up and down. I continued. “It was a
normal thing for you to follow the model of your mother and
father in marriage. Almost all of us tend to do that, but your
behavior toward Mary was a radical change from your
courtship. The one thing that had assured her of your love
disappeared.”
Then I turned to Mary and asked, “What did you hear
Mark say when I asked, ‘Why did you do all of those things
to help Mary when you were dating?’”
“He said that it came naturally to him,” she replied.
“That’s right,” I said, “and he also said that is what he
would want someone to do for him if she loved him. He was
doing those things for you and with you because in his mind
that’s the way anyone shows love. Once you were married
and living in your own house, he had expectations of what
you would do if you loved him. You would keep the house
clean, you would cook, and so on. In brief, you would do

things for him to express your love. When he did not see
you doing those things, do you understand why he would
feel unloved?” Mary’s head was also bobbing now. I
continued, “My guess is that the reason you are both so
unhappy in your marriage is that neither of you is showing
your love by doing things for each other.”
Mary said, “I think you are right, and the reason I
stopped doing things for him is because I resented his
demanding spirit. It was as if he were trying to make me be
like his mother.”
“You are right,” I said, “and no one likes to be forced to
do anything. In fact, love is always freely given. Love cannot
be demanded. We can request things of each other, but we
must never demand anything. Requests give direction to
love, but demands stop the flow of love.”
Mark broke in and said, “She’s right, Dr. Chapman. I
was demanding and critical of her because I was
disappointed in her as a wife. I know I said some cruel
things, and I understand how she could be upset with me.”
“I think things can be turned around rather easily at this
juncture,” I said. I pulled two note cards out of my pocket.
“Let’s try something. I want each of you to sit on the steps of
the church and make a request list. Mark, I want you to list
three or four things that if Mary chose to do them would
make you feel loved when you walk into the house in the
afternoon. If making the bed is important to you, then put it
down. Mary, I want you to make a list of three or four things
that you would really like to have Mark’s help in doing,

things which, if he chose to do them, would help you know
that he loved you.” (I’m big on lists; they force us to think
concretely.)
After five to six minutes, they handed me their lists.
Mark’s list read:
Make up the beds every day.
Have the baby’s face washed when I get home.
Put her shoes in the closet before I get home.
Try to have supper at least started before I get home
so that we could eat within 30–45 minutes after I get
home.
I read the list out loud and said to Mark, “I’m
understanding you to say that if Mary chooses to do these
four things, you will view them as acts of love toward you.”
“That’s right,” he said, “if she did those four things, it
would go a long way in changing my attitude toward her.”
Then I read Mary’s list:
I wish he would wash the car every week instead of
expecting me to do it.

I wish he would change the baby’s diaper after he
gets home in the afternoon, especially if I am working
on supper.
I wish he would vacuum the house for me once a
week.
I wish he would mow the grass every week in the
summer and not let it get so tall that I am ashamed of
our yard.
I said, “Mary, I am understanding you to say that if Mark
chooses to do those four things, you would take his actions
as genuine expressions of love toward you.”
“That’s right,” she said. “It would be wonderful if he
would do those things for me.”
“Does this list seem reasonable to you, Mark? Is it
feasible for you to do these things?”
“Yes,” he said.
“Mary, do the things on Mark’s list seem reasonable
and feasible to you? Could you do them if you chose to?”
“Yes,” she said, “I can do those things. In the past, I
have felt overwhelmed because no matter what I did, it was
never enough.”
“Mark,” I said, “you understand that what I am
suggesting is a change from the model of marriage that
your mother and father had.”

“Oh,” he said, “my father mowed the grass and washed
the car.”
“But he didn’t change the diapers or vacuum the floor,
right?”
“Right,” he said.
“You don’t have to do these, you understand? If you do
them, however, it will be an act of love to Mary.”

What we do for each other before marriage is no
indication of what we will do after marriage.
And to Mary I said, “You understand that you don’t have
to do these things, but if you want to express love for Mark,
here are four ways that will be meaningful to him. I want to
suggest that you try these for two months and see if they
help. At the end of two months, you may want to add
additional requests to your lists and share them with each
other. I would not add more than one request per month,
however.”
“This really makes sense,” Mary said. “I think you have
helped us,” Mark said. They took each other by the hand
and walked toward their car. I said to myself out loud, “I
think this is what church is all about. I think I am going to
enjoy being a counselor.” I have never forgotten the insight I
gained under that chinaberry tree.

After years of research, I have realized what a unique
situation Mark and Mary presented me. Seldom do I meet a
couple who both have the same love language. For both
Mark and Mary, “acts of service” was their primary love
language. Hundreds of individuals can identify with either
Mark or Mary and acknowledge that the primary way that
they feel loved is by acts of service on the part of their
spouse. Putting away shoes, changing a baby’s diaper,
washing dishes or a car, vacuuming, or mowing speaks
volumes to the individual whose primary love language is
acts of service.
You may be wondering, If Mark and Mary had the

same primary love language, why were they having so
much difficulty? The answer lies in the fact that they were
speaking different dialects. They were doing things for
each other but not the most important things. When they
were forced to think concretely, they easily identified their
specific dialects. For Mary it was washing the car,
changing the baby’s diaper, vacuuming the floor, and
mowing the grass, whereas for Mark it was making up the
bed, washing the baby’s face, putting the shoes in the
closet, and having supper underway when he got home
from work. When they started speaking the right dialects,
their love tanks began to fill. Since acts of service was their
primary love language, learning each other’s specific
dialect was relatively easy for them.
Before we leave Mark and Mary, I would like to make

three other observations. First, they illustrate clearly that
what we do for each other before marriage is no indication
of what we will do after marriage. Before marriage, we are
carried along by the force of the in-love obsession. After
marriage, we revert to being the people we were before we
“fell in love.” Our actions are influenced by the model of our
parents, our own personality, our perceptions of love, our
emotions, needs, and desires. Only one thing is certain
about our behavior: It will not be the same behavior we
exhibited when we were caught up in being “in love.”
That leads me to the second truth illustrated by Mark
and Mary. Love is a choice and cannot be coerced. Mark
and Mary were criticizing each other’s behavior and getting
nowhere. Once they decided to make requests of each
other rather than demands, their marriage began to turn
around. Criticism and demands tend to drive wedges. With
enough criticism, you may get acquiescence from your
spouse. He may do what you want, but probably it will not
be an expression of love. You can give guidance to love by
making requests: “I wish you would wash the car, change
the baby’s diaper, mow the grass,” but you cannot create
the will to love. Each of us must decide daily to love or not
to love our spouses. If we choose to love, then expressing it
in the way in which our spouse requests will make our love
most effective emotionally.
There is a third truth, which only the mature lover will be
able to hear. My spouse’s criticisms about my behavior
provide me with the clearest clue to her primary love

language. People tend to criticize their spouse most loudly
in the area where they themselves have the deepest
emotional need. Their criticism is an ineffective way of
pleading for love. If we understand that, it may help us
process their criticism in a more productive manner. A wife
may say to her husband after he gives her a criticism, “It
sounds like that is extremely important to you. Could you
explain why it is so crucial?” Criticism often needs
clarification. Initiating such a conversation may eventually
turn the criticism into a request rather than a demand.
Mary’s constant condemnation of Mark’s hunting was not
an expression of her hatred for the sport of hunting. She
blamed hunting as the thing that kept him from washing the
car, vacuuming the house, and mowing the grass. When he
learned to meet her need for love by speaking her
emotional love language, she became free to support him
in his hunting.

D

OORMAT OR

L

OVER?

“I have served him for twenty years. I have waited on
him hand and foot. I have been his doormat while he
ignored me, mistreated me, and humiliated me in front of
my friends and family. I don’t hate him. I wish him no ill, but I
resent him, and I no longer wish to live with him.” That wife
has performed acts of service for twenty years, but they
have not been expressions of love. They were done out of

fear, guilt, and resentment.

Due to the sociological changes of the past thirty years,
there is no longer a common stereotype of the male and
female role in American society.
A doormat is an inanimate object. You can wipe your
feet on it, step on it, kick it around, or whatever you like. It
has no will of its own. It can be your servant but not your
lover. When we treat our spouses as objects, we preclude
the possibility of love. Manipulation by guilt (“If you were a
good spouse, you would do this for me”) is not the
language of love. Coercion by fear (“You will do this or you
will be sorry”) is alien to love. No person should ever be a
doormat. We may allow ourselves to be used, but we are in
fact creatures of emotion, thoughts, and desires. And we
have the ability to make decisions and take action.
Allowing oneself to be used or manipulated by another is
not an act of love. It is, in fact, an act of treason. You are
allowing him or her to develop inhumane habits. Love says,
“I love you too much to let you treat me this way. It is not
good for you or me.”

O

VERCOMING

S

TEREOTYPES

Learning the love language of acts of service will

require some of us to reexamine our stereotypes of the
roles of husbands and wives. Mark was doing what most of
us do naturally. He was following the role model of his father
and mother, but he wasn’t even doing that well. His father
washed the car and mowed the grass. Mark did not, but
that was the mental image he had of what a husband
should do. He definitely did not picture himself vacuuming
floors and changing the baby’s diapers. To his credit, he
was willing to break from his stereotype when he realized
how important it was to Mary. That is necessary for all of us
if our spouse’s primary love language asks something of us
that seems inappropriate to our role.
Due to the sociological changes of the past thirty
years, there is no longer a common stereotype of the male
and female role in American society. Yet that does not
mean that all stereotypes have been removed. It means
rather that the number of stereotypes has been multiplied.
Before the days of television, a person’s idea of what a
husband or wife should do and how he or she should relate
was influenced primarily by one’s own parents. With the
pervasiveness of television and the proliferation of singleparent families, however, role models are often influenced
by forces outside the home. Whatever your perceptions,
chances are your spouse perceives marital roles
somewhat differently than you do. A willingness to examine
and change stereotypes is necessary in order to express
love more effectively. Remember, there are no rewards for
maintaining stereotypes, but there are tremendous benefits

to meeting the emotional needs of your spouse.

Recently a wife said to me, “Dr. Chapman, I am going to
send all of my friends to your seminar.”
“And why would you do that?” I inquired.
“Because it has radically changed our marriage,” she
said. “Before the seminar, Bob never helped me with
anything. We both started our careers right after college,
but it was always my role to do everything at the house. It
was as if it never crossed his mind to help me with
anything. After the seminar, he started asking me, ‘What
can I do to help you this evening?’ It was amazing. At first, I
couldn’t believe it was real, but it has persisted for three
years now.
“I’ll have to admit, there were some trying and
humorous times in those early weeks because he didn’t
know how to do anything. The first time he did the laundry,
he used undiluted bleach instead of regular detergent. Our
blue towels came out with white polka dots. Then there was
the first time he used the garbage disposal. It sounded
strange, and shortly afterward soap bubbles started
emerging from the drain of the adjoining sink. He didn’t
know what was happening until I turned the garbage
disposal off, reached my hand inside, and retrieved the
remains of a new bar of soap, now the size of a quarter. But
he was loving me in my language, and my tank was filling

up. Now he knows how to do everything around the house
and is always helping me. We have much more time
together because I don’t have to work all the time. Believe
me, I have learned his language, and I keep his tank full.”
Is it really that simple?
Simple? Yes. Easy? No. Bob had to work hard at
tearing down the stereotype with which he had lived for
thirty-five years. It didn’t come easily, but he would tell you
that learning the primary love language of your spouse and
choosing to speak it makes a tremendous difference in the
emotional climate of a marriage. Now, let’s move on to love
language number five.
NOTES

1. John 13:3–17.
2. Galatians 5:13.

If your spouse’s love language is Acts of Service:
1. Make a list of all the requests your spouse has
made of you over the past few weeks. Select one of
these each week and do it as an expression of love.
2. Cut out some heart-shaped note cards and print
the following:
“Today I will show my love for you by…” Complete the
sentence with one of the following: mowing the lawn,
vacuuming the floor, washing dishes, taking the dog for
a walk, cleaning the fish bowl, etc.
Give your spouse a love note accompanied by the act
of service every three days for a month.
3. Ask your spouse to make a list of ten things he or
she would like for you to do during the next month.
Then ask your spouse to prioritize those by numbering
them 1–10, with 1 being the most important and 10
being least important. Use this list to plan your strategy
for a month of love. (Get ready to live with a happy
spouse.)
4. While your spouse is away, get the children to
help you with some act of service for him. When he

walks in the door, join the children in shouting
“Surprise! We love you!” Then share your act of
service.
5. What one act of service has your spouse nagged
about consistently? Why not decide to see the nag as
a tag? Your spouse is tagging this as really important
to him or her. If you choose to do it as an expression of
love, it is worth more than a thousand roses.
6. If your spouse’s requests for acts of service come
across as nags or put-downs, try writing them in words
that would be less offensive to you. Share this revised
wording with your spouse. For example, “Honey, I love
you so much. You are a hardworking man and I really
appreciate you. I’d love to thank you in advance for
mowing the lawn this week before Thursday when
Mary and Bob come over for dinner.” Your husband
might even respond: “Where is the lawn mower, I can’t
wait!” Try it and see.
7. Do some major acts of service like washing the
car, cooking a meal, painting a bedroom, or washing
the deck, and then post a sign that reads, “To
(spouse’s name) with love,” and sign your name.
8. If you have more money than time, hire someone
to do the acts of service that you know your spouse

would like for you to do, such as the lawn, the
housecleaning, the car washing, the laundry. If you take
the responsibility for getting it done, you will be
speaking love even when you are away.
9. Ask your spouse to tell you the daily acts of
service that would really speak love to him or her.
These might include such things as putting your dirty
clothes in the hamper, getting the hairs out of the sink,
hanging up your clothes at night, closing the door when
you go outside, preparing a meal, and washing the
dishes. Seek to work these into your daily schedule.
“Little things” really do mean a lot.
10. Periodically ask your spouse, “If I could do one
special act of service this week, what would you
request?” If possible, do it and watch your spouse’s
love tank fill up!

chapter eight

Love Language #5

P

HYSICAL

T

OUCH

We have long known that physical touch is a way of
communicating emotional love. Numerous research
projects in the area of child development have made that
conclusion: Babies who are held, hugged, and kissed
develop a healthier emotional life than those who are left for
long periods of time without physical contact. The
importance of touching children is not a modern idea. In the
first century, the Hebrews living in Palestine, recognizing
Jesus as a great teacher, brought their children to Him “to
have him touch them.”1 You may remember that Jesus’
disciples rebuked those parents, thinking that Jesus was
too busy for such frivolous activity. But the Scriptures say
that Jesus was indignant with the disciples and said, “‘Let
the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for
the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. I tell you the
truth, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of God like a
little child will never enter it.’ And he took the children in his
arms, put his hands on them and blessed them.”2 Wise
parents, in any culture, are touching parents.

Physical touch is also a powerful vehicle for
communicating marital love. Holding hands, kissing,
embracing, and sexual intercourse are all ways of
communicating emotional love to one’s spouse. For some
individuals, physical touch is their primary love language.
Without it, they feel unloved. With it, their emotional tank is
filled, and they feel secure in the love of their spouse.
The old-timers used to say, “The way to a man’s heart
is through his stomach.” Many a man has been “fattened for
the kill” by women who have believed this philosophy. The
old-timers, of course, were not thinking of the physical heart
but of man’s romantic center. It would be more accurate to
say, “The way to some men’s hearts is through their
stomachs.” I remember the husband who said, “Dr.
Chapman, my wife is a gourmet cook. She spends hours in
the kitchen. She makes these elaborate meals. Me? I’m a
meat and potatoes man. I tell her she is wasting her time. I
like simple food. She gets hurt and says I don’t appreciate
her. I do appreciate her. I just wish she would make it easy
on herself and not spend so much time with the elaborate
meals. Then we would have more time together, and she
would have the energy to do some other things.” Obviously,
“other things” were closer to his heart than fancy foods.
That man’s wife was a frustrated lover. In the family in
which she grew up, her mother was an excellent cook and
her father appreciated her efforts. She remembers hearing
her father say to her mother, “When I sit down to meals like
this, it’s so easy for me to love you.” Her father was a

wellspring of positive comments to her mother about her
cooking. In private and in public, he praised her culinary
skills. That daughter learned well from her mother’s model.
The problem is that she is not married to her father. Her
husband has a different love language.
In my conversation with this husband, it didn’t take long
to discover that “other things” to him meant sex. When his
wife was sexually responsive, he felt secure in her love. But
when, for whatever reason, she withdrew from him sexually,
all of her culinary skills could not convince him that she
really loved him. He did not object to the fancy meals, but in
his heart they could never substitute for what he considered
to be “love.”

Sexual intercourse, however, is only one dialect in the love
language of physical touch. Of the five senses, touching,
unlike the other four, is not limited to one localized area of
the body. Tiny tactile receptors are located throughout the
body. When those receptors are touched or pressed,
nerves carry impulses to the brain. The brain interprets
these impulses and we perceive that the thing that touched
us is warm or cold, hard or soft. It causes pain or pleasure.
We may also interpret it as loving or hostile.

Physical touch can make or break a relationship. It can
communicate hate or love.

Some parts of the body are more sensitive than
others. The difference is due to the fact that the tiny tactile
receptors are not scattered evenly over the body but
arranged in clusters. Thus, the tip of the tongue is highly
sensitive to touch whereas the back of the shoulders is the
least sensitive. The tips of the fingers and the tip of the
nose are other extremely sensitive areas. Our purpose,
however, is not to understand the neurological basis of the
sense of touch but rather its psychological importance.
Physical touch can make or break a relationship. It can
communicate hate or love. To the person whose primary
love language is physical touch, the message will be far
louder than the words “I hate you” or “I love you.” A slap in
the face is detrimental to any child, but it is devastating to a
child whose primary love language is touch. A tender hug
communicates love to any child, but it shouts love to the
child whose primary love language is physical touch. The
same is true of adults.
In marriage, the touch of love may take many forms.
Since touch receptors are located throughout the body,
lovingly touching your spouse almost anywhere can be an
expression of love. That does not mean that all touches are
created equal. Some will bring more pleasure to your
spouse than others. Your best instructor is your spouse, of
course. After all, she is the one you are seeking to love.
She knows best what she perceives as a loving touch.

Don’t insist on touching her in your way and in your time.
Learn to speak her love dialect. Your spouse may find
some touches uncomfortable or irritating. To insist on
continuing those touches is to communicate the opposite of
love. It is saying that you are not sensitive to her needs and
that you care little about her perceptions of what is
pleasant. Don’t make the mistake of believing that the
touch that brings pleasure to you will also bring pleasure to
her.
Love touches may be explicit and demand your full
attention such as in a back rub or sexual foreplay,
culminating in intercourse. On the other hand, love touches
may be implicit and require only a moment, such as putting
your hand on his shoulder as you pour a cup of coffee or
rubbing your body against him as you pass in the kitchen.
Explicit love touches obviously take more time, not only in
actual touching but in developing your understanding of how
to communicate love to your spouse this way. If a back
massage communicates love loudly to your spouse, then
the time, money, and energy you spend in learning to be a
good masseur or masseuse will be well invested. If sexual
intercourse is your mate’s primary dialect, reading about
and discussing the art of sexual lovemaking will enhance
your expression of love.
Implicit love touches require little time but much
thought, especially if physical touch is not your primary love
language and if you did not grow up in a “touching family.”
Sitting close to each other on the couch as you watch your

favorite television program requires no additional time but
may communicate your love loudly. Touching your spouse
as you walk through the room where he is sitting takes only
a moment. Touching each other when you leave the house
and again when you return may involve only a brief kiss or
hug but will speak volumes to your spouse.
Once you discover that physical touch is the primary
love language of your spouse, you are limited only by your
imagination on ways to express love. Coming up with new
ways and places to touch can be an exciting challenge. If
you have not been an “under-the-table toucher,” you might
find that it will add a spark to your dining out. If you are not
accustomed to holding hands in public, you may find that
you can fill your spouse’s emotional love tank as you stroll
through the parking lot. If you don’t normally kiss as soon as
you get into the car together, you may find that it will greatly
enhance your travels. Hugging your spouse before she
goes shopping may not only express love, it may bring her
home sooner. Try new touches in new places and let your
spouse give you feedback on whether he finds it
pleasurable or not. Remember, he has the final word. You
are learning to speak his language.

T B I
HE

ODY

S FOR

T

OUCHING

Whatever there is of me resides in my body. To touch
my body is to touch me. To withdraw from my body is to

distance yourself from me emotionally. In our society
shaking hands is a way of communicating openness and
social closeness to another individual. When on rare
occasions one man refuses to shake hands with another, it
communicates a message that things are not right in their
relationship. All societies have some form of physical
touching as a means of social greeting. The average
American male may not feel comfortable with the European
bear hug and kiss, but in Europe that serves the same
function as our shaking hands.
There are appropriate and inappropriate ways to touch
members of the opposite sex in every society. The recent
attention to sexual harassment has highlighted the
inappropriate ways. Within marriage, however, what is
appropriate and inappropriate touching is determined by
the couple themselves, within certain broad guidelines.
Physical abuse is of course deemed inappropriate by
society, and social organizations have been formed to help
“the battered wife and the battered husband.” Clearly our
bodies are for touching, but not for abuse.

If your spouse’s primary love language is physical touch,
nothing is more important than holding her as she cries.
This age is characterized as the age of sexual
openness and freedom. With that freedom, we have

demonstrated that the open marriage where both spouses
are free to have sexual intimacies with other individuals is
fanciful. Those who do not object on moral grounds
eventually object on emotional grounds. Something about
our need for intimacy and love does not allow us to give our
spouse such freedom. The emotional pain is deep and
intimacy evaporates when we are aware that our spouse is
involved with someone else sexually. Counselors’ files are
filled with records of husbands and wives who are trying to
grapple with the emotional trauma of an unfaithful spouse.
That trauma, however, is compounded for the individual
whose primary love language is physical touch. That for
which he longs so deeply—love expressed by physical
touch—is now being given to another. His emotional love
tank is not only empty; it has been riddled by an explosion.
It will take massive repairs for those emotional needs to be
met.

C

RISIS AND

P

HYSICAL

T

OUCH

Almost instinctively in a time of crisis, we hug one
another. Why? Because physical touch is a powerful
communicator of love. In a time of crisis, more than
anything, we need to feel loved. We cannot always change
events, but we can survive if we feel loved.
All marriages will experience crises. The death of
parents is inevitable. Automobile accidents cripple and kill

thousands each year. Disease is no respecter of persons.
Disappointments are a part of life. The most important thing
you can do for your mate in a time of crisis is to love him or
her. If your spouse’s primary love language is physical
touch, nothing is more important than holding her as she
cries. Your words may mean little, but your physical touch
will communicate that you care. Crises provide a unique
opportunity for expressing love. Your tender touches will be
remembered long after the crisis has passed. Your failure
to touch may never be forgotten.

Since my first visit to West Palm Beach, Florida, many
years ago, I have always welcomed invitations to lead
marriage seminars in that area. It was on one such
occasion that I met Pete and Patsy. They were not native to
Florida (few are), but they had lived there for twenty years
and called West Palm Beach home. My seminar was
sponsored by a local church, and as we drove from the
airport, the pastor informed me that Pete and Patsy had
requested that I spend the night at their house. I tried to act
excited, but knew from experience that such a request
usually meant a late-night counseling session. However, I
was to be surprised in more than one way that night.
As the pastor and I entered the spacious, welldecorated, Spanish-style house, I was introduced to Patsy
and to Charlie, the family cat. As I looked around the house,

I had the hunch that either Pete’s business had done very
well, his father had left him a huge inheritance, or he was
hopelessly in debt. Later I discovered that my first hunch
was correct. When I was shown the guest room, I observed
that Charlie, the cat, was making himself at home,
stretched across the bed where I was to be sleeping. I
thought, This cat has it made.
Pete came home shortly, and we had a delightful
snack together and agreed that we would have dinner after
the seminar. Several hours later while sharing dinner, I kept
waiting for the counseling session to begin. It never did.
Instead, I found Pete and Patsy to be a healthy, happily
married couple. For a counselor, that is an oddity. I was
eager to discover their secret, but being extremely tired
and knowing that Pete and Patsy were going to drive me to
the airport the next day, I decided to do my probing when I
was feeling more alert. They showed me to my room.
Charlie, the cat, was nice enough to leave the room
when I got there. Bounding from the bed, he headed off to
another bedroom and within minutes, I was in bed. After a
brief reflection of the day, I was entering the twilight zone.
Just before losing touch with reality, the door to my
bedroom popped open and a monster leaped on top of
me! I had heard of Florida’s scorpions, but this was no
small scorpion. Without time to think, I grabbed the sheet
that was draped over my body and with one bloodcurdling
shriek, flung the monster against the far wall. I heard his
body hit the wall and then silence. Pete and Patsy came

running down the hallway, turned on the light, and we all
looked at Charlie lying still.
Pete and Patsy have never forgotten me, and I have
never forgotten them. Charlie did revive in a few minutes,
but he did not come back to my room. In fact, Pete and
Patsy told me later that Charlie never went back to that
bedroom again.
After my abuse of Charlie, I wasn’t sure whether Pete
and Patsy would still want to take me to the airport the next
day or if they would have any further interest in me.
However, my fears vanished when, after the seminar, Pete
said, “Dr. Chapman, I have been to many seminars, but I
have never heard anyone describe Patsy and me as clearly
as you. That love language idea is true. I can’t wait to tell
you our story!”
A few minutes after saying good-byes to those
attending the seminar, we were in the car for our forty-fiveminute drive to the airport. And Pete and Patsy began to
tell me their story. In the early years of their marriage, they
had tremendous difficulties. But some twenty-two years
earlier, all of their friends agreed that they were the “perfect
couple.” Pete and Patsy certainly believed that their
marriage was “made in heaven.”
They had grown up in the same community, attended
the same church, and graduated from the same high
school. Their parents had similar lifestyles and values. Pete
and Patsy enjoyed many of the same things. They both
liked tennis and boating, and they often talked about how

many interests they held in common. They seemed to
possess all the commonalities that are supposed to assure
fewer conflicts in marriage.
They began dating in their senior year in high school.
They attended separate colleges but managed to see each
other at least once a month and sometimes more often. By
the end of their freshman year, they were convinced that
they were “meant for each other.” They both agreed,
however, to finish college before marriage. For the next
three years, they enjoyed an idyllic dating relationship. One
weekend, he would visit her campus; the following
weekend, she would visit his campus; the third weekend,
they would go home to visit the folks but spend most of the
weekend with each other. The fourth weekend of each
month, they agreed not to see each other, thus giving each
of them freedom to develop individual interests. Except for
special events such as birthdays, they consistently followed
that schedule. Three weeks after he received his degree in
business and she a degree in sociology, they were
married. Two months later, they moved to Florida where
Pete had been offered a good job. They were two thousand
miles from their nearest relative. They could enjoy a
“honeymoon” forever.
The first three months were exciting—moving, finding a
new apartment, enjoying life together. The only conflict they
could remember was over washing dishes. Pete thought he
had a more efficient way to complete that chore. Patsy,
however, was not open to his idea. Eventually, they had

agreed that whoever washed the dishes could do it his/her
way, and that conflict was resolved. They were about six
months into the marriage when Patsy began to feel that
Pete was withdrawing from her. He was working longer
hours, and when he was at home, he spent considerable
time with the computer. When she finally expressed her
feelings that he was avoiding her, Pete told her that he was
not avoiding her but simply trying to stay on top of his job.
He said that she didn’t understand the pressure he was
under and how important it was that he do well in his first
year on the job. Patsy wasn’t pleased, but she decided to
give him space.
Patsy began to develop friendships with other wives
who lived in the apartment complex. Often when she knew
Pete was going to work late she would go shopping with
one of her friends instead of going straight home after
work. Sometimes she was not at home when Pete arrived.
That annoyed him greatly, and he accused her of being
thoughtless and irresponsible. Patsy retorted, “This is the
pot calling the kettle black. Who is irresponsible? You don’t
even call me and let me know when you will be home. How
can I be here for you when I don’t even know when you will
be here? And when you are here, you spend all your time
with that dumb computer. You don’t need a wife; all you
need is a computer!”
To which Pete loudly responded, “I do need a wife.
Don’t you understand? That’s the whole point. I do need a
wife.”

But Patsy did not understand. She was extremely
confused. In her search for answers, she went to the public
library and checked out several books on marriage.
“Marriage is not supposed to be this way,” she reasoned. “I
have to find an answer to our situation.” When Pete went to
the computer room, Patsy would pick up her book. In fact
on many evenings, she read until midnight. On his way to
bed, Pete would notice her and make sarcastic comments
such as, “If you read that much in college, you would have
made straight A’s.” Patsy would respond, “I am not in
college. I’m in marriage, and right now, I’d be satisfied with
a C.” Pete went to bed without so much as a second
glance.

At the end of the first year, Patsy was desperate.
At the end of the first year, Patsy was desperate. She
had mentioned it before, but this time she calmly said to
Pete, “I am going to find a marriage counselor. Do you want
to go with me?”
But Pete answered, “I don’t need a marriage
counselor. I don’t have time to go to a marriage counselor. I
can’t afford a marriage counselor.”
“Then I’ll go alone,” said Patsy.
“Fine, you are the one who needs counseling anyway.”
The conversation was over. Patsy felt totally alone, but

the next week she made an appointment with a marriage
counselor. After three sessions, the counselor called Pete
and asked if he would be willing to come in to talk about his
perspective on their marriage. Pete agreed, and the
process of healing began. Six months later, they left the
counselor’s office with a new marriage.

I said to Pete and Patsy, “What did you learn in counseling
that turned your marriage around?”
“In essence, Dr. Chapman,” Pete said, “we learned to
speak each other’s love language. The counselor did not
use that term, but as you gave the lecture today, the lights
came on. My mind raced back to our counseling
experience, and I realized that’s exactly what happened to
us. We finally learned to speak each other’s love language.”
“So what is your love language, Pete?” I asked.
“Physical touch,” he said without hesitation.
“Physical touch for sure,” said Patsy.
“And yours, Patsy?”
“Quality time, Dr. Chapman. That’s what I was crying
for in those days while he was spending all his time with his
job and his computer.”
“How did you learn that physical touch was Pete’s love
language?”
“It took a while,” Patsy said. “Little by little, it began to
come out in the counseling. At first, I don’t think Pete even

realized it.”
“She’s right,” Pete said. “I was so insecure in my own
sense of self-worth that it took forever for me to be willing to
identify and acknowledge that her lack of touch had caused
me to withdraw. I never told her that I wanted to be touched,
although I was crying inside for her to reach out and touch
me. In our dating relationship, I had always taken the
initiative in hugging, kissing, and holding hands, but she
had always been responsive. I felt that she loved me, but
after we got married, there were times that I reached out to
her physically and she was not responsive. Maybe with her
new job responsibilities she was too tired. I don’t know, but
I took it personally. I felt that she didn’t find me attractive.
Then I decided I would not take the initiative because I
didn’t want to be rejected. So I waited to see how long it
would be before she’d initiate a kiss or a touch or sexual
intercourse. Once I waited for six weeks before she
touched me at all. I found it unbearable. My withdrawal was
to stay away from the pain I felt when I was with her. I felt
rejected, unwanted, and unloved.”
Then Patsy said, “I had no idea that that was what he
was feeling. I knew that he was not reaching out to me. We
were not kissing and hugging as we had done earlier, but I
just assumed that since we were married, that was not as
important to him now. I knew that he was under pressure
with his job. I had no idea that he wanted me to take the
initiative.
“He’s right. I would go weeks without touching him. It

didn’t cross my mind. I was preparing meals, keeping the
house clean, doing his laundry, and trying to stay out of his
way. I honestly didn’t know what else I could be doing. I
could not understand his withdrawal or his lack of attention
to me. It’s not that I dislike touching; it’s just that it was never
that important to me. Spending time with me is what made
me feel loved and appreciated, giving me attention. It really
didn’t matter whether we hugged or kissed. As long as he
gave me his attention, I felt loved.
“It took us a long time to discover the root of the
problem, but once we discovered that we were not meeting
each other’s emotional need for love, we began to turn
things around. Once I began to take the initiative in giving
him physical touch, it’s amazing what happened. His
personality, his spirit changed drastically. I had a new
husband. Once he became convinced that I really did love
him, then he began to become more responsive to my
needs.”
“Does he still have a computer at home?” I asked.
“Yes,” she said, “but he seldom uses it and when he
does, it’s all right because I know that he is not ‘married’ to
the computer. We do so many things together that it’s easy
for me to give him the freedom to use the computer when
he wants to.”
“What amazed me at the seminar today,” Pete said,
“was the way your lecture on love languages carried me
back all these years to that experience. You said in twenty
minutes what it took us six months to learn.”

“Well,” I said, “it’s not how fast you learn it but how well
you learn it that matters. And obviously, you have learned it
well.”

Pete is only one of many individuals for whom physical
touch is the primary love language. Emotionally, they yearn
for their spouse to reach out and touch them physically.
Running the hand through the hair, giving a back rub,
holding hands, embracing, sexual intercourse—all of those
and other “love touches” are the emotional lifeline of the
person for whom physical touch is the primary love
language.
NOTES

1. Mark 10:13.
2. Mark 10:14–16.

If your spouse’s love language is Physical Touch:
1. As you walk from the car to the shopping mall, reach
out and hold your spouse’s hand. (Unless, of course, you
have three preschool children with you.)
2. While eating together, let your knee or foot drift over
and touch your spouse. Be careful you are not rubbing the
dog.
3. Walk up to your spouse and say, “Have I told you lately
that I love you?” Take her in your arms and hug her while
you rub her back and continue. “You are the greatest!”
(Resist the temptation to rush to the bedroom.) Untangle
yourself and move on to the next thing.
4. While your spouse is seated, walk up behind her and
initiate a shoulder massage. Continue for five minutes
unless your spouse begs you to stop.
5. If you sit together in church, when the minister calls for

prayer reach over and hold your spouse’s hand.
6. Initiate sex by giving your spouse a foot massage.
Continue to other parts of the body as long as it brings
pleasure to your spouse.
7. Run the water in the Jacuzzi and announce to your
spouse that you are looking for a partner to join you.
8. Riding down the road together, reach over and touch
your spouse on the leg, stomach, arm, hand, or…If he or
she says “stop!” by all means put on the brakes.
9. When family or friends are visiting, touch your spouse
in their presence. A hug, running your hand along his or her
arm, putting your arm around his as you stand talking, or
simply placing your hand on her shoulder can earn double
emotional points. It says, “Even with all these people in our
house, I still see you.”
10. When your spouse arrives at home, meet him or her
one step earlier than usual and give your mate a big hug. If
you normally meet at the door, go to the garage. If you
normally meet in the garage, go to the street. Then, as the

car turns into the driveway, stop your mate, lean into the
lowered window, and give him or her a kiss. If you normally
meet at the street, hide in the parking area and step out as
your mate opens the door and give him or her a hug. (Be
sure your mate sees you before you hug him or her.)

chapter nine

D

ISCOVERING

Y P
OUR

RIMARY

L L
OVE

ANGUAGE

Discovering the primary love language of your spouse is
essential if you are to keep his/her emotional love tank full.
But first, let’s make sure you know your own love language.
Having heard the five emotional love languages,

Words of Affirmation
Quality Time
Receiving Gifts
Acts of Service
Physical Touch
some individuals will know instantaneously their own
primary love language and that of their spouse. For others,
it will not be that easy. Some are like Bob from Parma
Heights, Ohio, who after hearing the five emotional love
languages said to me, “I don’t know. It seems that two of
those are just about equal for me.”
“Which two?” I inquired.
“‘Physical Touch’ and ‘Words of Affirmation,’” Bob
responded.

“By ‘Physical Touch,’ what do you mean?”
“Well, mainly sex,” Bob replied.
I probed a little further, asking, “Do you enjoy your wife
running her hands through your hair, or giving you a back
rub, or holding hands, or kissing and hugging you at times
when you are not having sexual intercourse?”
“Those things are fine,” said Bob. “I am not going to
turn them down, but the main thing is sexual intercourse.
That’s when I know that she really loves me.”
Leaving the subject of physical touch for a moment, I
turned to affirming words and asked, “When you say that
‘Words of Affirmation’ are also important, what kinds of
statements do you find most helpful?”
“Almost anything if it is positive,” Bob replied. “When
she tells me how good I look, how smart I am, what a hard
worker I am, when she expresses appreciation for the
things I do around the house, when she makes positive
comments about my taking time with the children, when she
tells me she loves me—all of those things really mean a lot
to me.”
“Did you receive those kinds of comments from your
parents when you were growing up?”
“Not very often,” Bob said. “Most of what I got from my
parents were critical or demanding words. I guess that’s
why I appreciated Carol so much in the first place, because
she gave me words of affirmation.”
“Let me ask you this. If Carol were meeting your sexual
needs, that is, if you were having quality sexual intercourse

as often as you desire, but she was giving you negative
words, making critical remarks, sometimes putting you
down in front of others, do you think you would feel loved by
her?”
“I don’t think so,” he replied. “I think I would feel
betrayed and deeply hurt. I think I would be depressed.”
“Bob,” I said, “I think we have just discovered that your
primary love language is ‘Words of Affirmation.’ Sexual
intercourse is extremely important to you and to your sense
of intimacy with Carol, but her words of affirmation are
more important to you emotionally. If she were, in fact,
verbally critical of you all the time and put you down in front
of other people, the time may come when you would no
longer desire to have sexual intercourse with her because
she would be a source of deep pain to you.”

Bob had made the mistake common to many men:
assuming that “Physical Touch” is their primary love
language because they desire sexual intercourse so
intensely. For the male, sexual desire is physically based.
That is, the desire for sexual intercourse is stimulated by
the buildup of sperm cells and seminal fluid in the seminal
vesicles. When the seminal vesicles are full, there is a
physical push for release. Thus, the male’s desire for
sexual intercourse has a physical root.

Most sexual problems in marriage have little to do with
physical technique but everything to do with meeting
emotional needs.
For the female, sexual desire is rooted in her
emotions, not her physiology. There is nothing physically
that builds up and pushes her to have intercourse. Her
desire is emotionally based. If she feels loved and admired
and appreciated by her husband, then she has a desire to
be physically intimate with him. But without the emotional
closeness she may have little physical desire.
Because the male is physically pushed to have sexual
release on a somewhat regular basis, he may automatically
assume that that is his primary love language. But if he
does not enjoy physical touch at other times and in
nonsexual ways, it may not be his love language at all.
Sexual desire is quite different from his emotional need to
feel loved. That doesn’t mean that sexual intercourse is
unimportant to him—it is extremely important—but sexual
intercourse alone will not meet his need to feel loved. His
wife must speak his primary emotional love language as
well.
When, in fact, his wife speaks his primary love
language and his emotional love tank is full, and he speaks
her primary love language and her emotional tank is full, the
sexual aspect of their relationship will take care of itself.
Most sexual problems in marriage have little to do with

physical technique but everything to do with meeting
emotional needs.
After further conversation and reflection, Bob said,
“You know, I think you are right. ‘Words of Affirmation’ is
definitely my primary love language. When she has been
cutting and critical of me verbally, I tend to withdraw from
her sexually and fantasize about other women. But when
she tells me how much she appreciates me and admires
me, my natural sexual desires are turned toward her.” Bob
had made a significant discovery in our brief conversation.

What is your primary love language? What makes you
feel most loved by your spouse? What do you desire above
all else? If the answer to those questions does not leap to
your mind immediately, perhaps it will help to look at the
negative use of love languages. What does your spouse do
or say or fail to do or say that hurts you deeply? If, for
example, your deepest pain is the critical, judgmental
words of your spouse, then perhaps your love language is
“Words of Affirmation.” If your primary love language is
used negatively by your spouse—that is, he does the
opposite—it will hurt you more deeply than it would hurt
someone else because not only is he neglecting to speak
your primary love language, he is actually using that
language as a knife to your heart.

I remember Mary in Kitchener, Ontario, who said, “Dr.
Chapman, what hurts me most is that Ron never lifts a hand
to help me around the house. He watches television while I
do all the work. I don’t understand how he could do that if he
really loved me.” Mary’s deepest hurt, mainly that Ron did
not help her do things around the house, was the clue to her
primary love language—“Acts of Service.” If it grieves you
deeply that your spouse seldom gives you a gift for any
occasion, then perhaps your primary love language is
“Receiving Gifts.” If your deepest hurt is that your spouse
seldom gives you quality time, then that is your primary love
language.
Another approach to discovering your primary love
language is to look back over your marriage and ask,
“What have I most often requested of my spouse?”
Whatever you have most requested is probably in keeping
with your primary love language. Those requests have
probably been interpreted by your spouse as nagging. They
have been, in fact, your efforts to secure emotional love
from your spouse.
Elizabeth, who lived in Maryville, Indiana, used that
approach in discovering her primary love language. She
said to me at the conclusion of a seminar session,
“Whenever I look back over the last ten years of my
marriage and ask myself what have I most requested of
Peter, my love language becomes obvious. I have
requested ‘Quality Time’ most often. Over and over again, I

have asked him if we could go on a picnic, take a weekend
together away, shut the TV off for just an hour and talk with
each other, take a walk together, and on and on. I have felt
neglected and unloved because seldom did he ever
respond to my request. He gave me nice gifts for my
birthday and special occasions and wondered why I was
not excited about them.
“During your seminar,” she continued, “the lights came
on for both of us. During the break, my husband apologized
for being so dense through the years and so resistant to my
requests. He has promised me that things will be different
in the future, and I believe they will.”

Another way to discover your primary love language is to
examine what you do or say to express love to your spouse.
Chances are what you are doing for her is what you wish
she would do for you. If you are constantly doing “Acts of
Service” for your spouse, perhaps (although not always)
that is your love language. If “Words of Affirmation” speak
love to you, chances are you will use them in speaking love
to your spouse. Thus, you may discover your own language
by asking, “How do I consciously express my love to my
spouse?”
But remember, that approach is only a possible clue to
your love language; it is not an absolute indicator. For
example, the husband who learned from his father to

express love to his wife by giving her nice gifts expresses
his love to his wife by doing what his father did, yet
“Receiving Gifts” is not his primary love language. He is
simply doing what he was trained to do by his father.

Spend some time writing down what you think is your
primary love language. Then list the other four in order of
importance.
I have suggested three ways to discover your own
primary love language.
1. What does your spouse do or fail to do that hurts you
most deeply? The opposite of what hurts you most is
probably your love language.
2. What have you most often requested of your spouse?
The thing you have most often requested is likely the thing
that would make you feel most loved.
3. In what way do you regularly express love to your
spouse? Your method of expressing love may be an
indication that that would also make you feel loved.

Using those three approaches will probably enable you
to determine your primary love language. If two languages
seem to be equal for you, that is, both speak loudly to you,
then perhaps you are bilingual. If so, you make it easier on
your spouse. Now he or she has two choices, either of
which will strongly communicate love to you.

Two kinds of people may have difficulty discovering their
primary love language. The first is the individual whose
emotional love tank has been full for a long time. Her
spouse has expressed love in many ways, and she is not
certain which of those ways makes her feel most loved.
She simply knows that she is loved. The second is the
individual whose love tank has been empty for so long that
he doesn’t remember what makes him feel loved. In either
case, go back to the experience of falling in love and ask
yourself, “What did I like about my spouse in those days?
What did he do or say that made me desire to be with
him?” If you can conjure up those memories, it will give you
some idea of your primary love language. Another
approach would be to ask yourself, “What would be an
ideal spouse to me? If I could have the perfect mate, what
would she be like?” Your picture of a perfect mate should
give you some idea of your primary love language.
Having said all of that, let me suggest that you spend
some time writing down what you think is your primary love

language. Then list the other four in order of importance.
Also write down what you think is the primary love language
of your spouse. You may also list the other four in order of
importance if you wish. Sit down with your spouse and
discuss what you guessed to be his/her primary love
language. Then tell each other what you consider to be your
own primary love language.
Once you have shared that information, I suggest that
you play the following game three times a week for three
weeks. The game is called “Tank Check,” and it is played
like this. When you come home, one of you says to the
other, “On a scale of zero to ten, how is your love tank
tonight?” Zero means empty, and 10 means “I am full of
love and can’t handle any more.” You give a reading on
your emotional love tank—10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, or 0,
indicating how full it is. Your spouse says, “What could I do
to help fill it?”
Then you make a suggestion—something you would
like your spouse to do or say that evening. To the best of
his ability, he will respond to your request. Then you repeat
the process in the reverse order so that both of you have
the opportunity to do a reading on your love tank and to
make a suggestion toward filling it. If you play the game for
three weeks, you will be hooked on it, and it can be a
playful way of stimulating love expressions in your
marriage.
One husband said to me, “I don’t like that love tank
game. I played it with my wife. I came home and said to her,

‘On a scale of zero to ten, how’s your love tank tonight?’
She said, ‘About seven.’ I asked, ‘What could I do to help fill
it?’ She said, ‘The greatest thing you could do for me
tonight is to do the laundry.’ I said, ‘Love and laundry? I
don’t get it.’”
I said, “That’s the problem. Perhaps you don’t
understand your wife’s love language. What’s your primary
love language?”
Without hesitation he said, “Physical touch, and
especially the sexual part of the marriage.”
“Listen to me carefully,” I said. “The love you feel when
your wife expresses love by physical touch is the same love
your wife feels when you do the laundry.”
“Bring on the laundry,” he shouted. “I’ll wash the clothes
every night if it makes her feel that good.”

Incidentally, if you have still not discovered your primary
love language, keep records on the tank check game.
When your spouse says, “What could I do to help fill your
tank?” your suggestions will likely cluster around your
primary love language. You may request things from all five
love languages, but you will have more requests centering
on your primary love language.
Perhaps some of you are saying in your minds what
Raymond and Helen said to me in Zion, Illinois. “Dr.
Chapman, all that sounds fine and wonderful, but what if the

love language of your spouse is something that just doesn’t
come naturally for you?”
I’ll discuss my answer in chapter 10.

chapter ten

L I C
OVE

SA

HOICE

How can we speak each other’s love language when we
are full of hurt, anger, and resentment over past failures?
The answer to that question lies in the essential nature of
our humanity. We are creatures of choice. That means that
we have the capacity to make poor choices, which all of us
have done. We have spoken critical words, and we have
done hurtful things. We are not proud of those choices,
although they may have seemed justified at the moment.
Poor choices in the past don’t mean that we must make
them in the future. Instead we can say, “I’m sorry. I know I
have hurt you, but I would like to make the future different. I
would like to love you in your language. I would like to meet
your needs.” I have seen marriages rescued from the brink
of divorce when couples make the choice to love.
Love doesn’t erase the past, but it makes the future
different. When we choose active expressions of love in the
primary love language of our spouse, we create an
emotional climate where we can deal with our past conflicts
and failures.

Brent was in my office, stone-faced and unfeeling. He had
come not by his own initiative, but at my request. A week
earlier his wife, Becky, had been sitting in the same chair,
weeping uncontrollably. Between her outbursts of tears, she
managed to verbalize that Brent had told her that he no
longer loved her and that he was leaving. She was
devastated.
When she regained her composure she said, “We
have both worked so hard the last two or three years. I
knew that we were not spending as much time together as
we used to, but I thought we were working for a common
goal. I cannot believe what he is saying. He has always
been such a kind and caring person. He is such a good
father to our children.” She continued, “How could he do this
to us?”
I listened as she described their twelve years of
marriage. It was a story I had heard many times before.
They had an exciting courtship, got married at the height of
the “in love experience,” had the typical adjustments in the
early days of marriage, and pursued the American dream.
In due time, they came down off the emotional high of the
“in love experience” but did not learn to speak each other’s
love language sufficiently. She had lived with a love tank
only half full for the last several years, but she had received
enough expressions of love to make her think that
everything was OK. However, his love tank was empty.
I told Becky that I would see if Brent would talk with me.

I told Brent on the phone, “As you know, Becky came to see
me and told me about her struggle with what is happening
in the marriage. I want to help her, but in order to do so, I
need to know what you are thinking.”
He agreed without hesitation, and now he sat in my
office. His outward appearance was in stark contrast to
Becky’s. She had been weeping uncontrollably, but he was
stoic. I had the impression, however, that his weeping had
taken place weeks or perhaps months ago and that it had
been an inward weeping. The story Brent told confirmed my
hunch.
“I just don’t love her anymore,” he said. “I haven’t loved
her for a long time. I don’t want to hurt her, but we are not
close. Our relationship has become empty. I don’t enjoy
being with her anymore. I don’t know what happened. I wish
it were different, but I don’t have any feelings for her.”
Brent was thinking and feeling what hundreds of
thousands of husbands have thought and felt through the
years. It’s the “I don’t love her anymore” mind-set that gives
men the emotional freedom to seek love with someone
else. The same is true for wives who use the same excuse.

I sympathized with Brent, for I have been there. Thousands
of husbands and wives have been there—emotionally
empty, wanting to do the right thing, not wanting to hurt
anyone, but being pushed by their emotional needs to seek

love outside the marriage. Fortunately, I had discovered in
the earlier years of my own marriage the difference
between the “in love experience” and the “emotional need”
to feel loved. Most in our society have not yet learned that
difference. The movies, the “soaps,” and the romantic
magazines have intertwined these two loves, thus adding to
our confusion, but they are, in fact, quite distinct.
The “in love experience” that we discussed in chapter
3 is on the level of instinct. It is not premeditated; it simply
happens in the normal context of male-female relationships.
It can be fostered or quenched, but it does not arise by
conscious choice. It is short-lived (usually two years or less)
and seems to serve for humankind the same function as the
mating call of the Canada geese.
The “in love experience” temporarily meets one’s
emotional need for love. It gives us the feeling that
someone cares, that someone admires us and appreciates
us. Our emotions soar with the thought that another person
sees us as number one, that he or she is willing to devote
time and energies exclusively to our relationship. For a
brief period, however long it lasts, our emotional need for
love is met. Our tank is full; we can conquer the world.
Nothing is impossible. For many individuals, it is the first
time they have ever lived with a full emotional tank, and it is
euphoric.

Meeting my wife’s need for love is a choice I make each

day. If I know her primary love language and choose to
speak it, her deepest emotional need will be met and she
will feel secure in my love.
In time, however, we come down from that natural high
back to the real world. If our spouse has learned to speak
our primary love language, our need for love will continue to
be satisfied. If, on the other hand, he or she does not speak
our love language, our tank will slowly drain, and we will no
longer feel loved. Meeting that need in one’s spouse is
definitely a choice. If I learn the emotional love language of
my spouse and speak it frequently, she will continue to feel
loved. When she comes down from the obsession of the “in
love experience,” she will hardly even miss it because her
emotional love tank will continue to be filled. However, if I
have not learned her primary love language or have chosen
not to speak it, when she descends from the emotional
high, she will have the natural yearnings of unmet emotional
need. After some years of living with an empty love tank,
she will likely “fall in love” with someone else and the cycle
will begin again.
Meeting my wife’s need for love is a choice I make
each day. If I know her primary love language and choose
to speak it, her deepest emotional need will be met and
she will feel secure in my love. If she does the same for me,
my emotional needs are met and both of us live with a full
tank. In a state of emotional contentment, both of us will

give our creative energies to many wholesome projects
outside the marriage while we continue to keep our
marriage exciting and growing.

With all of that in my mind, I looked back at the deadpan
face of Brent and wondered if I could help him. I knew in my
heart that he was probably already involved with another “in
love experience.” I wondered if it was in the beginning
stages or at its height. Few men, suffering from an empty
emotional love tank, leave their marriage until they have
prospects of meeting that need somewhere else.
Brent was honest and revealed that he had been in
love with someone else for several months. He had hoped
that the feelings would go away and that he could work
things out with his wife. But things at home had gotten
worse, and his love for the other woman had increased. He
could not imagine living without his new lover.
I sympathized with Brent in his dilemma. He sincerely
did not want to hurt his wife or his children, but at the same
time, he felt he deserved a life of happiness. I told him the
statistics on second marriages (60 percent ending in
divorce). He was surprised to hear that but was certain that
he would beat the odds. I told him about the research on the
effects of divorce on children, but he was convinced that he
would continue to be a good father to his children and that
they would get over the trauma of the divorce. I talked to

Brent about the issues in this book and explained the
difference between the experience of falling in love and the
deep emotional need to feel loved. I explained the five love
languages and challenged him to give his marriage another
chance. All the while, I knew that my intellectual and
reasoned approach to marriage compared to the
emotional high that he was experiencing was like pitting a
BB gun against an automatic weapon. He expressed
appreciation for my concern and asked that I do everything
possible to help Becky. But he assured me that he saw no
hope for the marriage.
One month later, I received a call from Brent. He
indicated that he would like to talk with me again. This time
when he entered my office he was noticeably disturbed. He
was not the calm, cool man I had seen before. His lover had
begun to come down off the emotional high, and she was
observing things in Brent that she did not like. She was
withdrawing from the relationship, and he was crushed.
Tears came to his eyes as he told me how much she meant
to him and how unbearable it was to experience her
rejection.
I listened sympathetically for an hour before Brent ever
asked for my advice. I told him how sympathetic I was to his
pain and indicated that what he was experiencing was the
natural emotional grief from a loss and that the grief would
not go away overnight. I explained, however, that the
experience was inevitable. I reminded him of the temporary
nature of the “in love experience,” that sooner or later, we

always come down from the high to the real world. Some
fall out of love before they get married; others, after they get
married. He agreed that it was better now than later.
After some time, I suggested that perhaps the crisis
was a good time for him and his wife to get some marriage
counseling. I reminded him that true, long-lasting emotional
love is a choice and that emotional love could be reborn in
his marriage if he and his wife learned to love each other in
the right love languages. He agreed to marriage
counseling; and nine months later, Brent and Becky left my
office with a reborn marriage. When I saw Brent three years
later, he told me what a wonderful marriage he had and
thanked me for helping him at a crucial time in his life. He
told me that the grief over losing the other lover had been
gone for more than two years. He smiled and said, “My tank
has never been so full, and Becky is the happiest woman
you are ever going to meet.”
Fortunately Brent was the benefactor of what I call the
disequilibrium of the “in love experience.” That is, almost
never do two people fall in love on the same day, and
almost never do they fall out of love on the same day. You
don’t have to be a social scientist to discover that truth. Just
listen to country and western songs. Brent’s lover happened
to have fallen out of love at an opportune time.

When an action doesn’t come naturally to you, it is a
greater expression of love.

In the nine months that I counseled Brent and Becky,
we worked through numerous conflicts that they had never
resolved before. But the key to the rebirth of their marriage
was discovering each other’s primary love language and
choosing to speak it frequently.

Let me return to the question I raised in chapter 9. “What if
the love language of your spouse is something that doesn’t
come naturally for you?” I am often asked this question at
my marriage seminars, and my answer is, “So?”
My wife’s love language is “Acts of Service.” One of
the things I do for her regularly as an act of love is to
vacuum the floors. Do you think that vacuuming floors
comes naturally for me? My mother used to make me
vacuum. All through junior high and high school, I couldn’t
go play ball on Saturday until I finished vacuuming the entire
house. In those days, I said to myself, “When I get out of
here, one thing I am not going to do: I am not going to
vacuum houses. I’ll get myself a wife to do that.”
But I vacuum our house now, and I vacuum it regularly.
And there is only one reason I vacuum our house. Love.
You couldn’t pay me enough to vacuum a house, but I do it
for love. You see, when an action doesn’t come naturally to
you, it is a greater expression of love. My wife knows that
when I vacuum the house, it’s nothing but 100 percent pure,

unadulterated love, and I get credit for the whole thing!
Someone says, “But, Dr. Chapman, that’s different. I
know that my spouse’s love language is physical touch, and
I am not a toucher. I never saw my mother and father hug
each other. They never hugged me, Dr. Chapman. I am just
not a toucher. What am I going to do?”
Do you have two hands? Can you put them together?
Now, imagine that you have your spouse in the middle and
pull him/her toward you. I’ll bet that if you hug your spouse
three thousand times, it will begin to feel more comfortable.
But ultimately, comfort is not the issue. We are talking
about love, and love is something you do for someone else,
not something you do for yourself. Most of us do many
things each day that do not come “naturally” for us. For
some of us, that is getting out of bed in the morning. We go
against our feelings and get out of bed. Why? Because we
believe there is something worthwhile to do that day. And
normally, before the day is over, we feel good about having
gotten up. Our actions preceded our emotions.
The same is true with love. We discover the primary
love language of our spouse, and we choose to speak it
whether or not it is natural for us. We are not claiming to
have warm, excited feelings. We are simply choosing to do
it for his or her benefit. We want to meet our spouse’s
emotional need, and we reach out to speak his love
language. In so doing, his emotional love tank is filled and
chances are he will reciprocate and speak our language.
When he does, our emotions return, and our love tank

begins to fill.

Love is a choice. And either partner can start the process
today.

chapter eleven

L M
OVE

AKES THE

D

IFFERENCE

Love is not our only emotional need. Psychologists have
observed that among our basic needs are the need for
security, self-worth, and significance. Love, however,
interfaces with all of those.
If I feel loved by my spouse, I can relax, knowing that
my lover will do me no ill. I feel secure in his/her presence. I
may face many uncertainties in my vocation. I may have
enemies in other areas of my life, but with my spouse I feel
secure.
My sense of self-worth is fed by the fact that my
spouse loves me. After all, if he/she loves me, I must be
worth loving. My parents may have given me negative or
mixed messages about my worth, but my spouse knows
me as an adult and loves me. Her love builds my selfesteem.
The need for significance is the emotional force
behind much of our behavior. Life is driven by the desire for
success. We want our lives to count for something. We
have our own idea of what it means to be significant, and
we work hard to reach our goals. Feeling loved by a
spouse enhances our sense of significance. We reason, If

someone loves me, I must have significance.
I am significant because I stand at the apex of the
created order. I have the ability to think in abstract terms,
communicate my thoughts via words, and make decisions.
By means of printed or recorded words, I can benefit from
the thoughts of those who have preceded me. I can profit
from others’ experience, though they lived in a different age
and culture. I experience the death of family and friends and
sense that there is existence beyond the material. I
discover that, in all cultures, people believe in a spiritual
world. My heart tells me it is true even when my mind,
trained in scientific observation, raises critical questions.
I am significant. Life has meaning. There is a higher
purpose. I want to believe it, but I may not feel significant
until someone expresses love to me. When my spouse
lovingly invests time, energy, and effort in me, I believe that I
am significant. Without love, I may spend a lifetime in
search of significance, self-worth, and security. When I
experience love, it impacts all of those needs positively. I
am now freed to develop my potential. I am more secure in
my self-worth and can now turn my efforts outward instead
of being obsessed with my own needs. True love always
liberates.
In the context of marriage, if we do not feel loved, our
differences are magnified. We come to view each other as
a threat to our happiness. We fight for self-worth and
significance, and marriage becomes a battlefield rather
than a haven.

Love is not the answer to everything, but it creates a
climate of security in which we can seek answers to those
things that bother us. In the security of love, a couple can
discuss differences without condemnation. Conflicts can be
resolved. Two people who are different can learn to live
together in harmony. We discover how to bring out the best
in each other. Those are the rewards of love.
The decision to love your spouse holds tremendous
potential. Learning his/her primary love language makes
that potential a reality. Love really does “make the world go
round.” At least it did for Jean and Norm.

They had traveled for three hours to get to my office. It was
obvious that Norm did not want to be there. Jean had
twisted his arm by threats of leaving him. (I do not suggest
this approach, but people do not always know my
suggestions before they come to see me.) They had been
married for thirty-five years and had never gone to
counseling before.
Jean began the conversation. “Dr. Chapman, I want
you to know two things up front. First of all, we don’t have
any money problems. I was reading in a magazine that
money is the biggest problem in marriage. That’s not true
for us. We both have worked through the years, the house
is paid for, the cars are paid for. We don’t have any money
problems. Second, I want you to know that we don’t argue. I

hear my friends talking about the arguments they have all
the time. We have never argued. I can’t remember the last
time we ever had an argument. Both of us agree that
arguing is fruitless, so we don’t argue.”
As a counselor, I appreciated Jean’s clearing the path.
I knew that she was going to get right to the point. It was
obvious that she had thought through her opening
statement. She wanted to make sure we didn’t get bogged
down in nonproblems. She wanted to use the hour wisely.
She continued. “The problem is that I just don’t feel any
love coming from my husband. Life is a routine for us. We
get up in the morning and go off to work. In the afternoon,
he does his thing and I do my thing. We generally have
dinner together, but we don’t talk. He watches TV while we
eat. After dinner, he piddles in the basement and then
sleeps in front of the TV until I tell him it’s time to go to bed.
That is our schedule five days a week. On Saturday, he
plays golf in the morning, works in the yard in the afternoon,
and we go out to dinner with another couple on Saturday
night. He talks to them, but when we get into the car to go
home, the conversation is over. Once we are at home, he
sleeps in front of the TV until we go to bed. On Sunday
morning, we go to church. We always go to church on
Sunday morning, Dr. Chapman,” she emphasized.
“Then,” she said, “we go out to lunch with some friends.
When we get home, he sleeps in front of the TV all Sunday
afternoon. We usually go back to church on Sunday night,
come home, eat popcorn, and go to bed. That’s our

schedule every week. That’s all there is to it. We are like
two roommates living in the same house. There is nothing
going on between us. I don’t feel any love coming from him.
There is no warmth, there’s no emotion. It’s empty, it’s
dead. I don’t think I can go on much longer like this.”
By that time, Jean was crying. I handed her a tissue
and looked at Norm. His first comment was, “I don’t
understand her.” After a brief pause, he continued. “I have
done everything I know to show her that I love her,
especially the last two or three years since she’s been
complaining about it so much. Nothing seems to help. No
matter what I do, she continues to complain that she
doesn’t feel loved. I don’t know what else to do.”
I could tell that Norm was frustrated and exasperated. I
inquired, “What have you been doing to show your love for
Jean?”
“Well, for one thing,” he said, “I get home from work
before she does, so I get dinner started every night. In fact,
if you want to know the truth, I have dinner almost ready
when she gets home four nights a week. The other night,
we go out to eat. After dinner, I wash dishes three nights a
week. The other night I have a meeting, but three nights I
wash the dishes after dinner is over. I do all the vacuuming
because her back is bad. I do all the yard work because
she is allergic to pollen. I fold the clothes when they come
out of the dryer.”
He went on telling me other things that he did for Jean.
When he finished, I wondered, What does this woman do?

There was almost nothing left for her.
Norm continued, “I do all those things to show her that I
love her, yet she sits there and says to you what she has
been saying to me for two or three years—that she doesn’t
feel loved. I don’t know what else to do for her.”
When I turned back to Jean she said, “Dr. Chapman,
all of those things are fine, but I want him to sit on the couch
and talk to me. We don’t ever talk. We haven’t talked in
thirty years. He’s always washing dishes, vacuuming the
floor, mowing the grass. He’s always doing something. I
want him to sit on the couch with me and give me some
time, look at me, talk to me about us, about our lives.”
Jean was crying again. It was obvious to me that her
primary love language was “Quality Time.” She was crying
for attention. She wanted to be treated as a person, not an
object. Norm’s busyness did not meet her emotional need.
As I talked further with Norm, I discovered that he didn’t feel
loved either, but he wasn’t talking about it. He reasoned, “If
you have been married for thirty-five years and your bills are
paid and you don’t argue, what more can you hope for?”
That’s where he was. But when I said to him, “What would
be an ideal wife to you? If you could have a perfect wife,
what would she be like?” he looked me in the eye for the
first time and asked, “Do you really want to know?”
“Yes,” I said.
He sat up on the couch and folded his arms across his
chest. A big smile broke on his face, and he said, “I’ve
dreamed about this. A perfect wife would be a wife who

would come home in the afternoon and fix dinner for me. I
would be working in the yard, and she would call me in to
eat. After dinner, she would wash the dishes. I would
probably help her some, but she would take the
responsibility. She would sew the buttons on my shirt when
they fall off.”
Jean could contain herself no longer. She turned to him
and said, “I’m not believing you. You told me that you liked
to cook.”
“I don’t mind cooking,” Norm responded, “but the man
asked me what would be ideal.”
I knew Norm’s primary love language without another
word—“Acts of Service.” Why do you think Norm did all of
those things for Jean? Because that was his love language.
In his mind, that’s the way you show love: by doing things for
people. The problem was that “doing things” was not
Jean’s primary love language. It did not mean to her
emotionally what it would have meant to him if she had
been doing things for him.
When the light came on in Norm’s mind, the first thing
he said was, “Why didn’t somebody tell me this thirty years
ago? I could have been sitting on the couch talking to her
fifteen minutes every night instead of doing all this stuff.”
He turned to Jean and said, “For the first time in my
life, I finally understand what you mean when you say ‘We
don’t talk.’ I could never understand that. I thought we did
talk. I always ask, ‘Did you sleep well?’ I thought we were
talking, but now I understand. You want to sit on the couch

fifteen minutes every night and look at each other and talk.
Now I understand what you mean, and now I know why it is
so important to you. It is your emotional love language, and
we’ll start tonight. I’ll give you fifteen minutes on the couch
every night for the rest of my life. You can count on that.”
Jean turned to Norm and said, “That would be
heavenly, and I don’t mind fixing dinner for you. It will have to
be later than usual because I get off work later than you, but
I don’t mind fixing dinner. And I would love to sew your
buttons on. You never left them off long enough for me to
get them. I’ll wash dishes the rest of my life if it will make
you feel loved.”
Jean and Norm went home and started loving each
other in the right love languages. In less than two months,
they were on a second honeymoon. They called me from
the Bahamas to tell me what a radical change had taken
place in their marriage.

Can emotional love be reborn in a marriage? You bet.
The key is to learn the primary love language of your
spouse and choose to speak it.

chapter twelve

L

OVING THE

U

NLOVELY

It was a beautiful September Saturday. My wife and I were
strolling through Reynolda Gardens, enjoying the flora,
some of which had been imported from around the world.
The gardens had originally been developed by R. J.
Reynolds, the tobacco magnate, as a part of his country
estate. They are now a part of the Wake Forest University
campus. We had just passed the rose garden when I
noticed Ann, a woman who had begun counseling two
weeks earlier, approaching us. She was looking down at
the cobblestone walkway and appeared to be in deep
thought. When I greeted her, she was startled but looked up
and smiled. I introduced her to Karolyn, and we exchanged
pleasantries. Then, without any lead-in, she asked me one
of the most profound questions I have ever heard: “Dr.
Chapman, is it possible to love someone whom you hate?”
I knew the question was born of deep hurt and
deserved a thoughtful answer. I knew that I would be seeing
her the following week for another counseling appointment,
so I said, “Ann, that is one of the most thought-provoking
questions I have ever heard. Why don’t we discuss that next
week?” She agreed, and Karolyn and I continued our stroll.

But Ann’s question did not go away. Later, as we drove
home, Karolyn and I discussed it. We reflected on the early
days of our own marriage and remembered that we had
often experienced feelings of hate. Our condemning words
to each other had stimulated hurt and, on the heels of hurt,
anger. Anger held inside becomes hate. What made the
difference for us? We both knew it was the choice to love.
We had realized that if we continued our pattern of
demanding and condemning, we would destroy our
marriage. Fortunately over a period of about a year, we had
learned how to discuss our differences without condemning
each other, how to make decisions without destroying our
unity, how to give constructive suggestions without being
demanding, and eventually how to speak each other’s
primary love language. (Many of those insights are
recorded in an earlier book, Toward a Growing Marriage,
Moody Publishers.) Our choice to love was made in the
midst of negative feelings toward each other. When we
started speaking each other’s primary love language, the
negative feelings of anger and hate abated.
Our situation, however, was different from Ann’s.
Karolyn and I had both been open to learning and growing. I
knew that Ann’s husband was not. She had told me the
previous week that she had begged him to go for
counseling. She had pleaded for him to read a book or
listen to a tape on marriage, but he had refused all her
efforts toward growth. According to her, his attitude was: “I
don’t have any problems. You are the one with the

problems.” In his mind he was right, she was wrong—it was
as simple as that. Her feelings of love for him had been
killed through the years by his constant criticism and
condemnation. After ten years of marriage, her emotional
energy was depleted and her self-esteem almost
destroyed. Was there hope for Ann’s marriage? Could she
love an unlovely husband? Would he ever respond in love to
her?
I knew that Ann was a deeply religious person and that
she attended church regularly. I surmised that perhaps her
only hope for marital survival was in her faith. The next day,
with Ann in mind, I began to read Luke’s account of the life
of Christ. I have always admired Luke’s writing because he
was a physician who gave attention to details and in the
first century wrote an orderly account of the teachings and
lifestyle of Jesus of Nazareth. In what many have called
Jesus’ greatest sermon, I read the following words, which I
call love’s greatest challenge.

I tell you who hear me: Love your enemies, do good
to those who hate you, bless those who curse you,
pray for those who mistreat you…. Do to others as
you would have them do to you. If you love those who
love you, what credit is that to you? Even “sinners”
love those who love them.1
It seemed to me that that profound challenge, written

almost two thousand years ago, might be the direction that
Ann was looking for, but could she do it? Could anyone do
it? Is it possible to love a spouse who has become your
enemy? Is it possible to love one who has cursed you,
mistreated you, and expressed feelings of contempt and
hate for you? And if she could, would there be any
payback? Would her husband ever change and begin to
express love and care for her? I was astounded by this
further word from Jesus’ ancient sermon: “Give, and it will
be given to you. A good measure, pressed down, shaken
together and running over, will be poured into your lap. For
with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.”2
Could that ancient principle of loving an unlovely
person possibly work in a marriage as far gone as Ann’s? I
decided to do an experiment. I would take as my
hypothesis that if Ann could learn her husband’s primary
love language and speak it for a period of time so that his
emotional need for love was met, eventually he would
reciprocate and begin to express love to her. I wondered,

Would it work?
I met with Ann the next week and listened again as she
reviewed the horrors of her marriage. At the end of her
synopsis, she repeated the question she had asked in
Reynolda Gardens. This time she put it in the form of a
statement: “Dr. Chapman, I just don’t know if I can ever love
him again after all he has done to me.”
“Have you talked about your situation with any of your
friends?” I asked.

“With two of my closest friends,” she said, “and a little
bit with some other people.”
“And what was their response?”
“Get out,” she said. “They all tell me to get out, that he
will never change, and that I am simply prolonging the
agony. But, Dr. Chapman, I just can’t bring myself to do that.
Maybe I should, but I just can’t believe that’s the right thing
to do.”
“It seems to me that you are torn between your
religious and moral beliefs that tell you it is wrong to get out
of the marriage, and your emotional pain, which tells you
that getting out is the only way to survive,” I said.
“That’s exactly right, Dr. Chapman. That’s exactly the
way I feel. I don’t know what to do.”

When the tank is low…we have no love feelings toward
our spouse but simply experience emptiness and pain.
“I am deeply sympathetic with your struggle,” I
continued. “You are in a very difficult situation. I wish I could
offer you an easy answer. Unfortunately, I can’t. Both of the
alternatives you mentioned, getting out or staying in, will
likely bring you a great deal of pain. Before you make that
decision, I do have one idea. I am not sure it will work, but
I’d like you to try it. I know from what you have told me that
your religious faith is important to you and that you have a

great deal of respect for the teachings of Jesus.”
She nodded affirmingly. I continued, “I want to read
something that Jesus once said that I think has some
application to your marriage.” I read slowly and deliberately.
“‘I tell you who hear me: Love your enemies, do good
to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for
those who mistreat you…. Do to others as you would have
them do to you. If you love those who love you, what credit
is that to you? Even “sinners” love those who love them.’
“Does that sound like your husband? Has he treated
you as an enemy rather than as a friend?” I inquired.
She nodded her head affirmingly.
“Has he ever cursed you?” I asked.
“Many times.”
“Has he ever mistreated you?”
“Often.”
“And has he told you that he hates you?”
“Yes.”
“Ann, if you are willing, I would like to do an
experiment. I would like to see what would happen if we
apply this principle to your marriage. Let me explain what I
mean.” I went on to explain to Ann the concept of the
emotional tank and the fact that when the tank is low, as
hers was, we have no love feelings toward our spouse but
simply experience emptiness and pain. Since love is such
a deep emotional need, the lack of it is perhaps our
deepest emotional pain. I told her that if we could learn to
speak each other’s primary love language, that emotional

need could be met and positive feelings could be
engendered again.
“Does that make sense to you?” I inquired.
“Dr. Chapman, you have just described my life. I have
never seen it so clearly before. We were in love before we
got married, but not long after our marriage we came down
off the high and we never learned to speak each other’s
love language. My tank has been empty for years, and I am
sure his has also. Dr. Chapman, if I had understood this
concept earlier, maybe none of this would have happened.”
“We can’t go back, Ann,” I said. “All we can do is try to
make the future different. I would like to propose a sixmonth experiment.”
“I’ll try anything,” Ann said.
I liked her positive spirit, but I wasn’t sure whether she
understood how difficult the experiment would be.
“Let’s begin by stating our objective,” I said. “If in six
months you could have your fondest wish, what would it
be?”
Ann sat in silence for some time. Then thoughtfully she
said, “I would like to see Glenn loving me again and
expressing it by spending time with me. I would like to see
us doing things together, going places together. I would like
to feel that he is interested in my world. I would like to see
us talking when we go out to eat. I’d like him to listen to me.
I’d like to feel that he values my ideas. I would like to see us
taking trips together and having fun again. I would like to
know that he values our marriage more than anything.”

Ann paused and then continued. “On my part, I would
like to have warm, positive feelings toward him again. I
would like to gain respect for him again. I would like to be
proud of him. Right now, I don’t have those feelings.”
I was writing as Ann was speaking. When she finished,
I read aloud what she had said. “That sounds like a pretty
lofty objective,” I said, “but is that really what you want,
Ann?”
“Right now, that sounds like an impossible objective,
Dr. Chapman,” Ann replied, “but more than anything, that’s
what I would like to see.”
“Then let’s agree,” I said, “that this will be our objective.
In six months, we want to see you and Glenn having this
kind of love relationship.
“Now, let me suggest a hypothesis. The purpose of our
experiment will be to prove whether or not the hypothesis is
true. Let’s hypothesize that if you could speak Glenn’s
primary love language consistently for a six-month period,
that somewhere along the line his emotional need for love
would begin to be met; and as his emotional tank filled, he
would begin to reciprocate love to you. That hypothesis is
built upon the idea that the emotional need for love is our
deepest emotional need; and when that need is being met,
we tend to respond positively to the person who is meeting
it.”
I continued, “You understand that that hypothesis
places all the initiative in your hands. Glenn is not trying to
work on this marriage. You are. This hypothesis says that if

you can channel your energies in the right direction, there is
a good possibility that Glenn will eventually reciprocate.” I
read the other portion of Jesus’ sermon recorded by Luke,
the physician. “‘Give, and it will be given to you. A good
measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over,
will be poured into your lap. For with the measure you use,
it will be measured to you.’
“As I understand that, Jesus is stating a principle, not a
way to manipulate people. Generally speaking, if we are
kind and loving toward people, they will tend to be kind and
loving toward us. That does not mean that we can make a
person kind by being kind to him. We are independent
agents. Thus, we can spurn love and walk away from love
or even spit into the face of love. There is no guarantee that
Glenn will respond to your acts of love. We can only say that
there is a good possibility he will do so.” (A counselor can
never predict with absolute certainty individual human
behavior. Based on research and personality studies, a
counselor can only predict how a person is likely to respond
in a given situation.)
After we agreed on the hypothesis, I said to Ann, “Now
let’s discuss your and Glenn’s primary love languages. I’m
assuming from what you have told me already that quality
time may be your primary love language. What do you
think?”
“I think so, Dr. Chapman. In the early days when we
spent time together and Glenn listened to me, we spent
long hours talking together, doing things together. I really

felt loved. More than anything, I wish that part of our
marriage could return. When we spend time together, I feel
like he really cares, but when he’s always doing other
things, never has time to talk, never has time to do anything
with me, I feel like business and other pursuits are more
important than our relationship.”
“And what do you think Glenn’s primary love language
is?” I inquired.
“I think it is physical touch and especially the sexual
part of the marriage. I know that when I felt more loved by
him and we were more sexually active, he had a different
attitude. I think that’s his primary love language, Dr.
Chapman.”
“Does he ever complain about the way you talk to
him?”
“Well, he says I nag him all the time. He also says that I
don’t support him, that I’m always against his ideas.”
“Then, let’s assume,” I said, “that ‘Physical Touch’ is
his primary love language and ‘Words of Affirmation’ is his
secondary love language. The reason I suggest the second
is that if he complains about negative words, apparently
positive words would be meaningful to him.
“Now, let me suggest a plan to test our hypothesis.
What if you go home and say to Glenn, ‘I’ve been thinking
about us and I’ve decided that I would like to be a better
wife to you. So if you have any suggestions as to how I
could be a better wife, I want you to know that I am open to
them. You can tell me now or you can think about it and let

me know what you think, but I would really like to work on
being a better wife.’ Whatever his response, negative or
positive, simply accept it as information. That initial
statement lets him know that something different is about to
happen in your relationship.

If you claim to have feelings that you do not have, that is
hypocritical…. But if you express an act of love that is
designed for the other person’s benefit or pleasure, it is
simply a choice.
“Then based upon your guess that his primary love
language is ‘Physical Touch’ and my suggestion that his
secondary love language may be ‘Words of Affirmation,’
focus your attention on those two areas for one month.
“If Glenn comes back with a suggestion as to how you
might be a better wife, accept that information and work it
into your plan. Look for positive things in Glenn’s life and
give him verbal affirmation about those things. In the
meantime, stop all verbal complaints. If you want to
complain about something, write it down in your personal
notebook rather than saying anything about it to Glenn this
month.
“Begin taking more initiative in physical touch and
sexual involvement. Surprise him by being aggressive, not
simply responding to his advances. Set a goal to have

sexual intercourse at least once a week the first two weeks
and twice a week the following two weeks.” Ann had told
me that she and Glenn had had sexual intercourse only
once or twice in the past six months. I figured this plan
would get things off dead center rather quickly.
“Oh, Dr. Chapman, this is going to be difficult,” Ann
said. “I have found it hard to be sexually responsive to him
when he ignores me all the time. I have felt used rather than
loved in our sexual encounters. He acts as though I am
totally unimportant all the rest of the time and then wants to
jump in bed and use my body. I have resented that, and I
guess that’s why we have not had sex very often in the last
few years.”
“Your response has been natural and normal,” I
assured Ann. “For most wives, the desire to be sexually
intimate with their husbands grows out of a sense of being
loved by their husbands. If they feel loved, then they desire
sexual intimacy. If they do not feel loved, they likely feel
used in the sexual context. That is why loving someone who
is not loving you is extremely difficult. It goes against our
natural tendencies. You will probably have to rely heavily
upon your faith in God in order to do this. Perhaps it will
help if you read again Jesus’ sermon on loving your
enemies, loving those who hate you, loving those who use
you. And then ask God to help you practice the teachings of
Jesus.”
I could tell that Ann was following what I was saying.
Her head was nodding ever so slightly. Her eyes told me

she had lots of questions.
“But, Dr. Chapman, isn’t it being hypocritical to
express love sexually when you have such negative feelings
toward the person?”
“Perhaps it would be helpful for us to distinguish
between love as a feeling and love as an action,” I said. “If
you claim to have feelings that you do not have, that is
hypocritical and such false communication is not the way to
build intimate relationships. But if you express an act of
love that is designed for the other person’s benefit or
pleasure, it is simply a choice. You are not claiming that the
action grows out of a deep emotional bonding. You are
simply choosing to do something for his benefit. I think that
must be what Jesus meant.
“Certainly we do not have warm feelings for people
who hate us. That would be abnormal, but we can do loving
acts for them. That is simply a choice. We hope that such
loving acts will have a positive effect upon their attitudes
and behavior and treatment, but at least we have chosen to
do something positive for them.”
My answer seemed to satisfy Ann, at least for the
moment. I had the feeling that we would discuss that again.
I also had the feeling that if the experiment was going to get
off the ground, it would be because of Ann’s deep faith in
God.
“After the first month,” I said, “I want you to ask Glenn
for feedback on how you are doing. Using your own words,
ask him, ‘Glenn, you remember a few weeks ago when I

told you I was going to try to be a better wife? I want to ask
how you think I am doing.’
“Whatever Glenn says, accept it as information. He
may be sarcastic, he may be flippant or hostile, or he may
be positive. Whatever his response, do not argue but
accept it and assure him that you are serious and that you
really want to be a better wife, and if he has additional
suggestions, you are open to them.
“Follow this pattern of asking for feedback once a
month for the entire six months. Whenever Glenn gives you
the first positive feedback, whenever he says, ‘You know, I
have to admit that when you first told me that you were
going to try to be better, I pretty much laughed it off, but I’ll
have to acknowledge that things are different around here,’
you will know that your efforts are getting through to him
emotionally. He may give you positive feedback after the
first month, or it may be after the second or third. One week
after you receive the first positive feedback, I want you to
make a request of Glenn—something that you would like
him to do, something in keeping with your primary love
language. For example, you may say to him one evening,
‘Glenn, do you know something I would like to do? Do you
remember how we used to play Scrabble together? I’d like
to play Scrabble with you on Thursday night. The kids are
going to be staying at Mary’s. Do you think that would be
possible?’
“Make the request something specific, not general.
Don’t say, ‘You know, I wish we would spend more time

together.’ That’s too vague. How will you know when he’s
done it? But if you make your request specific, he will know
exactly what you want and you will know that, when he does
it, he is choosing to do something for your benefit.
“Make a specific request of him each month. If he does
it, fine; if he doesn’t do it, fine. But when he does it, you will
know that he is responding to your needs. In the process,
you are teaching him your primary love language because
the requests you make are in keeping with your love
language. If he chooses to begin loving you in your primary
language, your positive emotions toward him will begin to
resurface. Your emotional tank will begin to fill up and in
time the marriage will, in fact, be reborn.”

Perhaps you need a miracle in your own marriage. Why
not try Ann’s experiment?
“Dr. Chapman, I would do anything if that could
happen,” Ann said.
“Well,” I responded, “it will take a lot of hard work, but I
believe it’s worth a try. I’m personally interested to see if
this experiment works and if our hypothesis is true. I would
like to meet with you regularly throughout this process—
perhaps every two weeks—and I would like you to keep
records on the positive words of affirmation that you give
Glenn each week. Also, I would like you to bring me your list

of complaints that you have written in your notebook without
stating them to Glenn. Perhaps from the felt complaints, I
can help you build specific requests for Glenn that will help
meet some of those frustrations. Eventually, I want you to
learn how to share your frustrations and irritations in a
constructive way, and I want you and Glenn to learn how to
work through those irritations and conflicts. But during this
six-month experiment, I want you to write them down without
telling Glenn.”
Ann left, and I believed that she had the answer to her
question: “Is it possible to love someone whom you hate?”
In the next six months, Ann saw a tremendous change
in Glenn’s attitude and treatment of her. The first month, he
was flippant and treated the whole thing lightly. But after the
second month, he gave her positive feedback about her
efforts. In the last four months, he responded positively to
almost all of her requests, and her feelings for him began to
change drastically. Glenn never came for counseling, but he
did listen to some of my tapes and discuss them with Ann.
He encouraged Ann to continue her counseling, which she
did for another three months after our experiment. To this
day, Glenn swears to his friends that I am a miracle worker.
I know in fact that love is a miracle worker.

Perhaps you need a miracle in your own marriage. Why
not try Ann’s experiment? Tell your spouse that you have

been thinking about your marriage and have decided that
you would like to do a better job of meeting his/her needs.
Ask for suggestions on how you could improve. His
suggestions will be a clue to his primary love language. If
he makes no suggestions, guess his love language based
on the things he has complained about over the years.
Then, for six months, focus your attention on that love
language. At the end of each month, ask your spouse for
feedback on how you are doing and for further suggestions.
Whenever your spouse indicates that he is seeing
improvement, wait one week and then make a specific
request. The request should be something you really want
him to do for you. If he chooses to do it, you will know that
he is responding to your needs. If he does not honor your
request, continue to love him. Maybe next month he will
respond positively. If your spouse starts speaking your love
language by responding to your requests, your positive
emotions toward him will return, and in time your marriage
will be reborn. I cannot guarantee the results, but scores of
people whom I have counseled have experienced the
miracle of love.
NOTES

1. Luke 6:27–28, 31–32.
2. Luke 6:38.

chapter thirteen

C

HILDREN AND

L L
OVE

ANGUAGES

Does the concept of love languages apply to children? I
am often asked that question by those attending my
marriage seminars. My unqualified answer is yes. When
children are little, you don’t know their primary love
language. Therefore, pour on all five and you are bound to
hit it; but if you observe their behavior, you can learn their
primary love language rather early.
Bobby is six years old. When his father comes home
from work, Bobby jumps into his lap, reaches up, and
messes up his father’s hair. What is Bobby saying to his
father? “I want to be touched.” He is touching his father
because he wants to be touched. Bobby’s primary love
language is likely “Physical Touch.”
Patrick lives next door to Bobby. He is five and a half,
and he and Bobby are playmates. Patrick’s father,
however, faces a different scenario when he comes home
from work. Patrick says excitedly, “Come here, Daddy. I
want to show you something. Come here.”
His father says, “Just a minute, Patrick, I want to look
at the paper.”
Patrick leaves for a moment but is back in fifteen

seconds, saying, “Daddy, come to my room. I want to show
you now, Daddy. I want to show you now.”
His father replies, “Just a minute, son. Let me finish
reading.”
Patrick’s mother calls him, and he dashes off. His
mother tells him that his father is tired and please let him
read the paper for a few minutes. Patrick says, “But,
Mommy, I want to show him what I made.”
“I know,” says his mother, “but let Dad read for a few
minutes.”
Sixty seconds later, Patrick is back to his father and
instead of saying anything, he jumps into his father’s paper,
laughing. His father says, “What are you doing, Patrick?”
Patrick says, “I want you to come to my room, Daddy. I
want to show you what I made.”
What is Patrick requesting? “Quality Time.” He wants
his father’s undivided attention, and he won’t stop until he
gets it, even if he must create a scene.

If your child is often making presents for you, wrapping
them up and giving them to you with a special glee in his or
her eye, your child’s primary love language is probably
“Receiving Gifts.” He gives to you because he desires to
receive. If you observe your son or daughter always trying to
help a younger brother or sister, it probably means that his
or her primary love language is “Acts of Service.” If he or

she is often telling you how good you look and what a good
mother or father you are and what a good job you did, it is
an indicator that his or her primary love language is “Words
of Affirmation.”
All of that is on the subconscious level for the child.
That is, the child is not consciously thinking, “If I give a gift,
my parents will give me a gift; if I touch, I will be touched,”
but her behavior is motivated by her own emotional
desires. Perhaps she has learned by experience that when
she does or says certain things, she typically receives
certain responses from her parents. Thus, she does or says
that which results in getting her own emotional needs met. If
all goes well and their emotional needs are met, children
develop into responsible adults; but if the emotional need is
not met, they may violate acceptable standards, expressing
anger toward parents who did not meet their needs, and
seeking love in inappropriate places.
Dr. Ross Campbell, the psychiatrist who first told me
about the emotional love tank, says that in his many years
of treating adolescents who have been involved in sexual
misconduct, he has never treated such an adolescent
whose emotional need for love has been met by the
parents. His opinion was that almost all sexual misconduct
in adolescents is rooted in an empty emotional love tank.

Why is it that as the child gets older, our “Words of
Affirmation” turn to words of condemnation?

Have you seen that in your community? A teenager
runs away from home. The parents wring their hands,
saying, “How could he do this to us after all we have done
for him?” but the teenager is sixty miles down the road in
some counselor’s office, saying, “My parents don’t love me.
They have never loved me. They love my brother, but they
don’t love me.” Do the parents, in fact, love that teenager?
In the majority of cases, they do. Then what’s the problem?
Very likely, the parents never learned how to communicate
love in a language the child could understand.
Perhaps they bought ball gloves and bicycles to show
their love, but the child was crying, “Will someone play ball
with me? Will someone go riding with me?” The difference
between buying a ball glove and playing ball with a child
may be the difference between an empty love tank and a
full one. Parents can sincerely love their children (most do),
but sincerity is not enough. We must learn to speak the
primary love language of our children if we are to meet their
emotional need for love.
Let’s look at the five love languages in the context of
loving children.

W

ORDS OF

A

FFIRMATION

Parents typically give many affirming words when the
child is young. Even before the child understands verbal

communication, parents are saying, “What a pretty nose,
what beautiful eyes, what curly hair,” and so on. When the
child begins to crawl, we applaud every movement and give
“Words of Affirmation.” When he begins to walk and stands
with one hand against the couch, we stand two feet away
and say, “Come on, come on, come on. That’s right! Walk.
That’s right, walk.” The child takes half a step and falls and
what do we say? We don’t say, “You dumb kid, can’t you
walk?” Rather, we say, “Yea, good job!” So he gets up and
tries again.
Why is it that as the child gets older, our “Words of
Affirmation” turn to words of condemnation? When the child
is seven we walk into the room and tell him to put the toys in
the toy box. Twelve toys are on the floor. We come back in
five minutes and seven toys are in the box, and what do we
say? “I told you to get these toys up. If you don’t get these
toys up, I am going to—” What about the seven toys in the
box? Why don’t we say, “Yea, Johnny, you put seven toys in
the box. That’s great.” The other five would probably jump
into the box! As the child gets older, we tend to condemn
him for his failures rather than commend him for his
successes.
To a child whose primary love language is “Words of
Affirmation,” our negative, critical, demeaning words strike
terror to her psyche. Hundreds of thirty-five-year-old adults
still hear words of condemnation spoken twenty years ago
ringing in their ears: “You’re too fat; nobody will ever date
you.” “You’re not a student. You may as well drop out of

school.” “I can’t believe you are so dumb.” “You are
irresponsible and will never amount to anything.” Adults
struggle with self-esteem and feel unloved all their lives
when their primary love language is violated in such a
detrimental manner.

Q

UALITY

T

IME

Quality time means giving a child undivided attention.
For the small child, it means sitting on the floor and rolling a
ball back and forth with him. We are talking about playing
with cars or dolls. We are talking about playing in the
sandbox and building castles, getting into his world, doing
things with him. You may be into computers as an adult, but
your child lives in a child’s world. You must get down on the
child’s level if you eventually want to lead him to the adult
world.
As the child gets older and develops new interests,
you must enter into those interests if you want to meet his
needs. If he is into basketball, get interested in basketball,
spend time playing basketball with him, take him to
basketball games. If he is into piano, perhaps you could
take a piano lesson or at least listen with undivided
attention for part of his practice period. Giving a child your
undivided attention says that you care, that he is important
to you, that you enjoy being with him.
Many adults, looking back on childhood, do not

remember much of what their parents said, but they do
remember what their parents did. One adult said, “I
remember that my father never missed my high school
games. I knew he was interested in what I was doing.” For
that adult, “Quality Time” was an extremely important
communicator of love. If “Quality Time” is the primary love
language of your child and you speak that language,
chances are he will allow you to spend quality time with him
even through the adolescent years. If you do not give him
quality time in the younger years, he will likely seek the
attention of peers during the adolescent years and turn
away from parents who may at that time desperately desire
more time with their children.

R

ECEIVING

G

IFTS

Many parents and grandparents speak the language of
gifts excessively. In fact, when one visits toy stores, one
wonders if parents believe that is the only language of love.
If parents have the money, they tend to buy many gifts for
their children. Some parents believe that that is the best
way to show love. Some parents try to do for their children
what their parents were unable to do for them. They buy
things that they wish they had had as a child. But unless that
is the primary love language of the child, gifts may mean
little emotionally to the child. The parent has good
intentions, but he/she is not meeting the emotional needs of

the child by giving gifts.
If the gifts you give are quickly laid aside, if the child
seldom says “thank you,” if the child does not take care of
the gifts that you have given, if she does not prize those
gifts, chances are “Receiving Gifts” is not her primary love
language. If, on the other hand, your child responds to you
with much thanksgiving, if she shows others the gift and
tells others how wonderful you are for buying the gift, if she
takes care of the gift, if she puts it in a place of prominence
in her room and keeps it polished, if she plays with it often
over an extended period of time, then perhaps “Receiving
Gifts” is her primary love language.
What if you have a child for whom “Receiving Gifts” is
his or her primary love language but you cannot afford many
gifts? Remember, it’s not the quality or cost of the gift; it is
the “thought that counts.” Many gifts can be handmade, and
sometimes the child appreciates that gift more than an
expensive, manufactured gift. In fact, younger children will
often play with a box more than the toy that came in it. You
can also find discarded toys and refinish them. The
process of refinishing can become a project for both parent
and child. You need not have lots of money in order to
provide gifts for your children.

A

CTS OF

S

ERVICE

When children are small, parents are continually doing

“Acts of Service” for them. If they did not, the child would
die. Bathing, feeding, and dressing all require a great deal
of work in the first few years of a child’s life. Then comes
cooking, washing, and ironing. Then comes packing
lunches, running a taxi service, and helping with homework.
Such things are taken for granted by many children, but for
other children those things communicate love.

Observe your children. Watch how they express love to
others. That is a clue to their love language.
If your child is often expressing appreciation for
ordinary acts of service, that is a clue that they are
emotionally important to him or her. Your acts of service are
communicating love in a meaningful way. When you help
him with a science project, it means more than a good
grade. It means “My parent loves me.” When you fix a
bicycle, you do more than get him back on wheels. You
send him away with a full tank. If your child consistently
offers to help you with your work projects, it probably means
that in his mind that is a way of expressing love, and “Acts
of Service” likely is his primary love language.

P

HYSICAL

T

OUCH

We have long known that “Physical Touch” is an

emotional communicator to children. Research has shown
that babies who are handled often develop better
emotionally than babies who are not. Naturally many
parents and other adults pick up an infant, hold it, cuddle it,
kiss it, squeeze it, and speak silly words to it. Long before
the child understands the meaning of the word love, she
feels loved. Hugging, kissing, patting, holding hands are all
ways of communicating love to a child. The hugging and
kissing of a teenager will differ from the hugging and
kissing of an infant. Your teenager may not appreciate such
behavior in the presence of peers, but that doesn’t mean
that he does not want to be touched, especially if it is his
primary love language.
If your teenager is regularly coming up behind you and
grabbing your arms, lightly pushing you, grabbing you by
the ankle when you walk through the room, tripping you,
those are all indications that “Physical Touch” is important
to him.
Observe your children. Watch how they express love to
others. That is a clue to their love language. Take note of
the things they request of you. Many times, their request will
be in keeping with their own love language. Notice the
things for which they are most appreciative. Those are
likely indicators of their primary love language.
Our daughter’s love language is “Quality Time”; thus,
as she grew up, she and I often took walks together. During
her high school years while she attended Salem Academy,
one of the oldest girls’ academies in the country, we took

walks amid the quaint surroundings of Old Salem. The
Moravians have restored the village, which is more than two
hundred years old. Walking the cobblestone streets takes
one back to a simpler time. Strolling through the ancient
cemetery gives one a sense of reality about life and death.
In those years, we walked three afternoons a week and had
long discussions in that austere setting. She is a medical
doctor now, but when she comes home, she almost always
says, “Want to take a walk, Dad?” I have never refused her
invitation.
My son would never walk with me. He said, “Walking’s
dumb! You’re not going anywhere. If you’re going
somewhere, drive.”
“Quality Time” was not his primary love language. As
parents, we often try to pour all of our children into the same
mold. We go to parenting conferences or read books on
parenting, get some wonderful ideas, and want to go home
and practice with each child. The problem is that each child
is different, and what communicates love to one child may
not communicate love to another. Forcing a child to take a
walk with you so that you can spend quality time together
will not communicate love. We must learn to speak our
children’s language if we want them to feel loved.

I believe that most parents sincerely love their children. I
also believe that thousands of parents have failed to

communicate love in the proper language and thousands of
children in this country are living with an empty emotional
tank. I believe that most misbehavior in children and
teenagers can be traced to empty love tanks.
It is never too late to express love. If you have older
children and realize that you have been speaking the wrong
love language, why not tell them? “You know, I have been
reading a book on how to express love, and I realize that I
have not been expressing my love to you in the best way
through the years. I have tried to show you my love by
_______, but I’m now realizing that that probably has not
communicated love to you, that your love language is
probably something different. I am beginning to think that
your love language is probably _______. You know, I really
do love you, and I hope that in the future I can express it to
you in better ways.” You might even want to explain the five
love languages to them and discuss your love language as
well as theirs.
Perhaps you do not feel loved by your older children. If
they are old enough to understand the concept of love
languages, your discussion may open their eyes. You may
be surprised at their willingness to start speaking your love
language and, if they do, you might be surprised at the way
your feelings and attitudes toward them begin to change.
When family members start speaking each other’s primary
love language, the emotional climate of a family is greatly
enhanced.

chapter fourteen

AP

ERSONAL

W

ORD

In chapter 2, I warned the reader that “understanding the
five love languages and learning to speak the primary love
language of your spouse may radically affect his or her
behavior.” Now I ask, “What do you think?” Having read
these pages, walked in and out of the lives of several
couples, visited small villages and large cities, sat with me
in the counseling office, and talked with people in
restaurants, what do you think? Could these concepts
radically alter the emotional climate of your marriage? What
would happen if you discovered the primary love language
of your spouse and chose to speak it consistently?
Neither you nor I can answer that question until you
have tried it. I know that many couples who have heard this
concept at my marriage seminars say that choosing to love
and expressing it in the primary love language of their
spouse has made a drastic difference in their marriage.
When the emotional need for love is met, it creates a
climate where the couple can deal with the rest of life in a
much more productive manner.
We each come to marriage with a different personality
and history. We bring emotional baggage into our marriage

relationship. We come with different expectations, different
ways of approaching things, and different opinions about
what matters in life. In a healthy marriage, that variety of
perspectives must be processed. We need not agree on
everything, but we must find a way to handle our differences
so that they do not become divisive. With empty love tanks,
couples tend to argue and withdraw, and some may tend to
be violent verbally or physically in their arguments. But when
the love tank is full, we create a climate of friendliness, a
climate that seeks to understand, that is willing to allow
differences and to negotiate problems. I am convinced that
no single area of marriage affects the rest of marriage as
much as meeting the emotional need for love.
The ability to love, especially when your spouse is not
loving you, may seem impossible for some. Such love may
require us to draw upon our spiritual resources. A number
of years ago, as I faced my own marital struggles, I
rediscovered my need for God. As an anthropologist, I had
been trained to examine data. I decided to personally
excavate the roots of the Christian faith. Examining the
historical accounts of Christ’s birth, life, death, and
resurrection, I came to view His death as an expression of
love and His resurrection as profound evidence of His
power. I became a true “believer.” I committed my life to
Him and have found that He provides the inner spiritual
energy to love, even when love is not reciprocated. I would
encourage you to make your own investigation of the one
whom, as He died, prayed for those who killed Him:

“Father, forgive them for they know not what they do.” That
is love’s ultimate expression.
The high divorce rate in our country bears witness that
thousands of married couples have been living with an
empty emotional love tank. The growing number of
adolescents who run away from home and clash with the
law indicates that many parents who may have sincerely
tried to express love to their children have been speaking
the wrong love language. I believe that the concepts in this
book could make an impact upon the marriages and
families of our country.
I have not written this book as an academic treatise to
be stored in the libraries of colleges and universities,
although I hope that professors of sociology and
psychology will find it helpful in courses on marriage and
family life. I have written not to those who are studying
marriage but to those who are married, to those who have
experienced the “in love” euphoria, who entered marriage
with lofty dreams of making each other supremely happy
but in the reality of day-to-day life are in danger of losing
that dream entirely. It is my hope that thousands of those
couples will not only rediscover their dream but will see the
path to making their dreams come true.
I dream of a day when the potential of the married
couples in this country can be unleashed for the good of
humankind, when husbands and wives can live life with full
emotional love tanks and reach out to accomplish their
potential as individuals and as couples. I dream of a day

when children can grow up in homes filled with love and
security, where children’s developing energies can be
channeled to learning and serving rather than seeking the
love they did not receive at home. It is my desire that this
brief volume will kindle the flame of love in your marriage
and in the marriages of thousands of other couples like you.
If it were possible, I would hand this book personally to
every married couple in this country and say, “I wrote this for
you. I hope it changes your life. And if it does, be sure to
give it to someone else.” Since I cannot do that, I would be
pleased if you would give a copy of this book to your family,
to your brothers and sisters, to your married children, to
your employees, to those in your civic club or church or
synagogue. Who knows, together we may see our dream
come true.

For a free on-line study guide please visit:

http://www.fivelovelanguages.com
The study guide was designed to take the concepts from
The Five Love Languages book and teach you how to
apply them to your life in a practical way. There is one page
of study notes per chapter. For couple or group studies and
discussion groups.

The Five Love Languages

P

ROFILE FOR

H

USBANDS

You may think you already know your primary love
language. Then again, you may have no clue. The Five
Love Languages Profile will help you know for certain which
love language is yours—Words of Affirmation, Quality
Time, Receiving Gifts, Acts of Service, or Physical Touch.
The profile consists of 30 pairs of statements. You can
only pick one statement in each pair as the one that best
represents your desire. Read each pair of statements, and
then, in the right-hand column, circle the letter that matches
up with the statement you choose. It may be tough at times
to decide between two statements, but you should only
choose one per pair to ensure the most accurate profile
results.
Allow at least 15 to 30 minutes to complete the profile.
Take it when you are relaxed, and try not to rush through it.
Once you’ve made your selections, go back and count the
number of times you circled each individual letter. You can
list the results in the appropriate spaces at the end of the
profile.

I

NTERPRETING AND

U Y P
SING

OUR

ROFILE

S

CORE

Your primary love language is the one that received the
highest score. You are “bilingual” and have two primary love
languages if point totals are equal for any two love
languages. If your second highest scoring love language is
close in score but not equal to your primary love language,
then this simply means that both expressions of love are
important to you. The highest possible score for any one
love language is 12.
You may have scored certain ones of the love
languages more highly than others, but do not dismiss
those other languages as insignificant. Your wife may
express love in those ways, and it will be helpful to you to
understand this about her.
In the same way, it will benefit your wife to know your
love language and express her affection for you in ways that
you interpret as love. Every time you or your wife speak
each other’s language, you score emotional points with one
another. Of course, this isn’t a game with a scorecard! The
payoff of speaking each other’s love language is a greater
sense of connection. This translates into better
communication, increased understanding, and, ultimately,
improved romance.
If your wife has not already done so, encourage her to
take The Five Love Languages Profile for Wives, which is

available on page 199. Discuss your respective love
languages, and use this insight to improve your marriage!

The Five Love Languages

P

ROFILE FOR

W

IVES

Words of Affirmation, Quality Time, Receiving Gifts, Acts
of Service, or Physical Touch? Which of these is your
primary love language? The following profile will help you
know for sure. Then you and your husband can discuss your
respective love languages and use this information to
improve your marriage!
The profile consists of 30 pairs of statements. You can
only pick one statement in each pair as the one that best
represents your desire. Read each pair of statements, and
then, in the right-hand column, circle the letter that matches
up with the statement you choose. It may be tough at times
to decide between two statements, but you should only
choose one per pair to ensure the most accurate profile
results. Once you’ve finished making your selections, go
back and count the number of times you circled each
individual letter. List the results in the appropriate spaces at
the end of the profile. Your primary love language is the one
that receives the most points.

I

NTERPRETING AND

U Y P
SING

OUR

ROFILE

S

CORE

Your primary love language is the one that received the
highest score. You are “bilingual” and have two primary love
languages if point totals are equal for any two love
languages. If your second highest scoring love language is
close in score but not equal to your primary love language,
then this simply means that both expressions of love are
important to you. The highest possible score for any one
love language is 12.
You may have scored certain ones of the love
languages more highly than others, but do not dismiss
those other languages as insignificant. Your husband may
express love in those ways, and it will be helpful to you to
understand this about him. In the same way, it will benefit
your husband to know your love language and express his
affection for you in ways that you interpret as love. Every
time you or your husband speak each other’s language, you
score emotional points with one another. Of course, this
isn’t a game with a scorecard! The payoff of speaking each
other’s love language is a greater sense of connection.
This translates into better communication, increased
understanding, and, ultimately, improved romance.

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments
1. What Happens to Love After the Wedding?
2. Keeping the Love Tank Full
3. Falling in Love
4. Love Language #1: Words of Affirmation
5. Love Language #2: Quality Time
6. Love Language #3: Receiving Gifts
7. Love Language #4: Acts of Service
8. Love Language #5: Physical Touch
9. Discovering Your Primary Love Language
10. Love Is a Choice
11. Love Makes the Difference
12. Loving the Unlovely
13. Children and Love Languages
14. A Personal Word
The Five Love Languages Profile for Husbands
The Five Love Languages Profile for Wives

